Let me join the previous speakers on congratulating you on your election as President of this important conference and assure you on Albania's support and confidence in your efforts toward a successful outcome.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Albania fully associates itself with the Statement of the European Union. However, I would like to make some remarks in my national capacity.
The NPT, based in its three main pillars, disarmament, non- proliferation and peaceful use of the nuclear energy, remains a cornerstone and an irreplaceable framework of world's peace and security. Albania is truly committed to this fundamental mechanism and to its further strengthening.
NPT has been under continued pressure but it has resisted to various tough challenges. The last four decades have shown that, thanks to the NPT, there are not as many nuclear weapon states as President Kennedy feared back in 1968. It is extremely important that all nations join their efforts to ensure its implementation and work towards its strengthening. Now, more than ever, we need to agree on a stronger Treaty that will reinforce security and will guarantee peace and stability in the whole world.
Recognizing the importance of achieving the ultimate goal of a World free of nuclear weapons we take god note of the growing momentum of the intermediate steps toward this goal, taken by nuclear weapons States. Albania welcomes the latest achievements in the field of disarmament, such as:
the signature of the new START Agreement between the United States and the Russian Federation on a further significant reduction of the strategic weapons;
The commitment of the US administration to work for the ratification of the CTBT;
The release of the US Nuclear Posture Review with the commitment to further reduce the role of the nuclear weapons
We welcome these positive developments and hope that this spirit will continue to drive the work of this Conference in order to produce a successful and balanced outcome;
The entry into force of the CTBT would be a major contribution toward the world peace and security. We call upon all states that have not yet signed the CTBT, or have not yet ratified it, to do so as soon as possible. We also hope that the Conference on Disarmament will be able to overcome the deadlock and will start the negotiations for a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty.
The IAEA safeguards system is fundamental for the nonproliferation regime. The verification instruments of the IAEA need to be strictly observed and further strengthened. The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and the Additional Protocol are very important tools for the preservation of the worlds peace and stability and the fight against nuclear terrorism. Since 1988, Albania has a Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement with the IAEA and has signed the Additional Protocol, which ratification is in the very final stage.
Albania has taken practical steps towards strengthened the fight against illegal trafficking of nuclear and radioactive material. We have upgraded and improved our legal framework in the field of export controls of arms
and dual use materials; we have upgraded border check points infrastructure with the necessary modern detection equipment.
Albania attaches great importance to the inalienable right of the peaceful use of the nuclear energy, as it is affirmed by the article IV of the Treaty. However, this right is intrinsically linked with the necessity for strict compliance with the obligations of the Article I, II, and III of the Treaty. To this effect, the IAEA verification instruments need to further be strengthened.	7
Mr. President,
We all know that time to act is now. We cannot afford to miss another opportunity and sincerely hope for a successful outcome of the Conference. It is only by joining forces for a safer and better world that we can achieve it.
Thank You.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



