ALGERIA
Permanent Mission of Algeria
to the United Nations
New York
Statement by
H.E. Mr. Sabri BOUKADOUM,
Permanent Representative
of Algeria to the United Nations
Before
The Third Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Review Conference
New York, 28 April 2014 
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to congratulate you for your election as Chair of the
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. I wish you, of course, every success in your new
responsi bi I ities.
I would like also to express my best wishes to the distinguished
members of the Bureau.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered by
Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by Kenya on
behalf of the African Group as well as the statement made by Iraq on
behalf of the Arab Group.
I would like to add the following comments:
Mr .. Chairman,
This Session of the Preparatory Committee, the last before the
holding, next year, of the Ninth Review Conference of the NPT, is
undoubtedly a milestone in the preparatory process. In this regard,
all States Parties to the NPT are called upon to participate, in a
constructive manner, in the work of our Committee.
The current review process, in which we are all engaged, is
mandated to evaluate the results of the implementation of
obligations undertaken by States Parties under the Treaty, and to
identify areas and means by which further progress could be
achieved in the future. In fact, we have to review the status of
implementation of commitments collectively undertaken, on the
basis of differentiated responsibilities, with a view to strengthening,
in an equitable manner, the three, complementary and indivisible,
fundamental pillars of the Treaty: nuclear disarmament, nonproliferation
of nuclear weapons, and peaceful use of nuclear
energy.
We believe that the Plan of Action, adopted by the 2010 NPT Review
Conference, constitutes a good basis to be considered by the 2015
NPT Review process in order to strengthen the full implementation
of the Treaty. 
We have to make things clear and tell our feelings in assessing the
implementation of the commitments, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that until now, 44 years after the entry into force of the
NPT, the results are not very encouraging, particularly in the field of
nuclear disarmament. We, obviously, acknowledge that some
measures have been taken, in recent years, to reduce nuclear
arsenals. But, overall, we note, with disappointment, the lack of
genuine progress in this area. In fact, nuclear-weapon States are far
from having fulfilled their obligations under the NPT and the 2010
Action Plan. Similarly, a predominance of issues related to measures
aiming to strengthen the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons are
more noticeable than those undertaken in the field of nuclear
disarmament, thus affecting the delicate balance between the three
pillars of the NPT. In addition, there is a selective and discriminatory
approach in the access to nuclear technology for civilian purposes.
Under such conditions, it is clear that the NPT is facing serious
difficulties for its implementation. In the long run, such difficulties
could undermine the credibility of the review process, as well as the
sustainability of the Treaty regime and its integrity.
This being said, I have to stress very clearly that Algeria its full
confidence in the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, unique international instrument and cornerstone of the
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It constitutes
the legal basis and the framework for the total elimination of nuclear
weapons. There is a need to implement the NPT, fully and effectively
and on a universal scale, if we want to make our proclaimed vision of
a world without nuclear weapons a reality.
Mr. Chairman,
Survival of mankind will remain threatened as long as the total
elimination of nuclear weapons is not considered as the highest
priority of the international community. The doctrines of nuclear
deterrence remain a major obstacle to achieve that objective. That
is why, we think that delegitimization of nuclear weapons is a
necessary step if we really want to free the world of these weapons.
2 
We should not forget that according to the Article VI of the NPT,
nuclear- weapon States have the primary responsibility to achieve
nuclear disarmament. Accordingly, nuclear-weapon States should
respect and fully implement their Treaty's obligations as well as
their commitments contained in the 13 practical steps and in the
2010 action Plan. Nuclear- weapon States must translate into
practice the identified measures to ensure that the elimination of
nuclear weapons is complete, irreversible and verifiable.
In this regard, Algeria welcomes the convening of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament, on 26
September 2013, and the subsequent adoption of Resolution 68/32
on 10 December 2013 . On the basis of these two major events, it is /
necessary to initiate a momentum to achieve real progress in the
field of nuclear disarmament.
The Algerian delegation calls, therefore, for an effective
implementation of Resolution 68/32.
As stipulated in this resolution, the Conference on Disarmament
must approve, at the earliest time, a comprehensive and balanced
programme of work, including an urgent commencement of
negotiations on a comprehensive Convention on nuclear weapons to
prohibit their possession, development, production, acquisition,
testing, stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use, and to provide for
their destruction.
With a view to strengthening the global architecture for nonproliferation
and nuclear disarmament, my delegation would like to
reiterate the importance of achieving universal adherence to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty in order to allow its entry
into force.
Furthermore, Algeria welcomes the convening of the Conference on
the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons held in Oslo in March
2013, and in Nayarit, in February 2014. Both meetings had allowed
highlighting, once again, irreversible devastating effects of nuclear
weapons and immeasurable suffering caused to human-beings.
Algeria, having been, unwillingly, a nuclear ground test, in the early
60's, understands and fully shares the trials and the consequencestill
this very day- of these bitter facts.
3 
Mr. Chairman,
Regarding the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, nuclearweapons
States as State Parties with nuclear weapons are
committed, under Article I of the NPT, not transfer to any recipient
whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or
control over such weapons or explosive devices directly, or
indirectly; and not in any way to assist, encourage, or induce any
non-nuclear-weapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, or control over
such weapons or explosive devices. Confronted to the reality, this
provision of the NPT requires to be strengthened in its
implementation.
In this regard, nuclear-weapon States and Member States of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group have a special responsibility in the
implementation of this obligation. We urge them to commit to
withholding their cooperation in the civil nuclear field to States
which are not parties to the NPT. Sufficient restrictive measures on
nuclear cooperation will deter those States remaining outside of the
NPT.
The establishment of nuclear-weapons-free zones constitutes, not
only a confidence measure, but a concrete step towards the
complete and general elimination of nuclear weapons. Several
regions of the world, including Africa, have been able to establish
such areas. We reaffirm that the entry into force, on 15 July 2009, of
the Pelindaba Treaty establishing a nuclear weapons free zone in
Africa, represents an important contribution to the strengthening of
international peace and security, and show the commitment of our
continent to that goal.
The example of Pelindaba Treaty, and other nuclear- weapon-free
zones should obviously be followed in the volatile region of MiddleEast.
Algeria deeply regrets that this region remains prevented of
such status 19 years after the adoption, by the NPT Review and
Extension Conference in 1995, of the Resolution on the
establishment of a nuclear- weapon-free zone.
4 
Rejecting this status quo, Algeria stresses its strong commitment to
the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East and
the 2010 Action Plan. My delegation expresses its strong
disappointment to the postponement of the Conference on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone and all other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle-East. We would like to thank the
Facilitator of the Conference Ambassador Jaakko Laajava for his
efforts and calls on the three co -sponsors of the 1995 Resolution on
the Middle-East as well as the Secretary General of the United
Nations to exert more efforts in order to convene the Conference,
before the end of 2014. It is obviously of the utmost importance that
all States in the region participate in this Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear safety and security remain a great challenge. The risk of
criminal use of nuclear materials and facilities by non-state actors
that are part of terrorist networks, is real and should be in our minds
as a priority.
For its part, Algeria completed its adherence procedures to all
international legal instruments for nuclear security and is currently
strengthening its national system of nuclear security.
Regarding the safeguards, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) plays a crucial role in this area. My delegation reiterates its
full confidence in the mandate of the IAEA. We urge all States that
have not yet done so, to bring into force comprehensive safeguards
agreements as soon as possible. The universality of such
agreements will consolidate and enhance the verification system for
the non-proliferation regime.
At the bilateral level, Algeria has excellent relationship with AIEA,
based on trust and partnership. The National Framework Programme
covering the period 2012-2017 concluded with the Agency opened a
qualitative phase for the excellent bilateral relations in technical
cooperation.
5 
Algeria would like also to stress the importance of full respect of the
inalienable right of all State Parties to the Treaty to develop
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination in accordance with Article IV of the NPT.
We consider, therefore, that each State Party in accordance with its
national requirements and in accordance with its rights and
obligations under the Treaty, has the sovereign right to define its
own energy policy, including the inalienable right to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. Nuclear energy is more than ever a
vehicle for development and progress.
Mr. Chairman,
Multiple challenges in the implementation of the NPT call for a
renewed commitment and increased multilateral cooperation in
order to achieve significant progress in the implementation of the
objectives of the Treaty. We strongly believe that the NPT three
pillars are interdependent and must be treated equally, and that we
must work together to achieve the common goal to free our world
from nuclear weapons.
It is in this spirit that the Algerian delegation is participating to this
session of the Preparatory Committee, which will determine, to a
large extent, the prospects for the 2015 NPT Review Conference.
I thank you for your attention.
6 