Mr. President Distinguished Heads of delegation Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like, Mr. President, to present to you the sincere congratulations of the Algerian delegation, upon your brilliant election for the Chair of the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty of Non-proliferation of the nuclear weapons. I am convinced that your experience and your personal and professional skills will enable you to steer our proceedings, as president of this Conference, to a positive outcome. I would like to ensure you of the full support of my delegation throughout this conference. 
Our congratulations of go also to the Presidents of the three Main Committees, who have steered with success the work of the sessions of the Preparatory Committee, as well as to the members of the Bureau of the Conference. 
The Algerian delegation associates itself with the Statement made on behalf of the Non Aligned Movement States parties to the NPT. 
Mr. President, 
Algeria which remains convinced that nuclear disarmament is the ultimate objective of the NPT, in accordance with its article VI, welcomes the holding of the 2010 Review Conference in a context of Renaissance of the option "zero nuclear weapon", where the total elimination of nuclear weapons remains the only way to permanently preventing their proliferation. 
In this context, I would like to reiterate my country's hope to see the International community, in particular the Nuclear Weapon States, commit themselves resolutely to a process aiming at the denuclearization of our planet and to the dismantling of nuclear arsenals still stockpiled, or currently deployed. 
Within the framework of our collective commitment to the purposes of nuclear disarmament, prior to a general and complete disarmament, the objective to put a final stop of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons remains also our natural quest that we have reaffirmed on many occasions. 
1 

The Treaty of Non-proliferation of the nuclear weapons remains, in this respect, a key instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security. It should be recognized that its adoption in 1968, contributed considerably to stop the risks of proliferation over the world. 
If it is commonly admitted that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are essential for confidence building and maintaining of international peace and security. It is also true that peaceful use of nuclear energy is an essential and necessary tool for development and progress. 
If such an evaluation were shared by all States present today, this Conference could be then the opportunity to break with the last failures and to give a new start to the review process in the direction of strengthening of the NPT through balanced measures which meet the requests of all States without discrimination 
This opportunity, which is offered to us today, should be seized: 
- To recognize, first that forty years after its adoption, the NPT reached the limits of a selective and discriminatory approach in its implementation, leading ultimately to the failure of the Review Conference of 2005; 
- To reiterate, the validity of universally admitted interpretation according to which the rights and the obligations of the States are based on the three fundamental, complementary and joint pillars of the NPT, which are nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; 
- to rehabilitate, finally, the NPT by making the difficult but necessary choice, of an effective implementation of all obligations derived from the Treaty without discrimination, to meet the aspirations of all State Parties and thus address the obstacles which prevent the NPT from being in perfect adequacy with its objectives and its purposes. 
Such a choice which would be, at the same time courageous and responsible, inevitably goes through the adoption of innovative and 
2 

strengthened measures that would confer on the outcome of this Review Conference the content and the scope which would live up to our aspirations for peace, security and progress. 
In this regard, the decisions and resolutions of the fifth and sixth NPT Review Conferences, hold respectively in 1995 and 2000, should be implemented. They must be the starting point for the work of this meeting. 
Mr. President, 
In preparation for this Conference, my country presented a detailed report on the implementation of the NPT as well as a number of Working documents on the important issues on the agenda of Main Committees. I will therefore, avoid getting into the issues and proposals already mentioned in the documents submitted by Algeria. 
There are however, important matters which will be tackled during this Conference and where concrete and urgent answers are needed. It is on these issues that I would like to say few words: 
I would refer, first, the question of Security assurances to Non nuclear weapon States, which remains the great concern of a vast majority of States Parties including my own country. Because at the time when one deplores the unjustified doctrines of national security based on the possession of nuclear arsenals capable of destroying several times the whole planet. Thus the question of assurances should be a priority and benefit from a deep consideration that will take into account, inter alia, the relevant decisions of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences. 
Within this framework and pending the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, Nuclear weapon States under the NPT, should endeavor to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in the national and regional defense policies. The New START Treaty constitutes, in this regard, a positive initiative in the process of nuclear disarmament. In order to live up to our aspirations, this Treaty should give the tone to a more reaffirmed and more reinvigorated process for the reduction of the nuclear arsenals; a process that would be progressive and constant and that would embrace strategic as well as tactical weapons and their vectors. 
3 

Mr. President 
I would refer, secondly, to the objective of the Non-proliferation for which Algeria proposes reinforcement for the implementation of Article I of the NPT, through which States Parties undertook not to assist, encourage nor otherwise incite Non nuclear weapon States to acquire such weapons in anyway what so ever. 
Nuclear weapon States and the nuclear suppliers Group, have a particular responsibility in the implementation of this Treaty's obligation. We exhort them to commit themselves not to grant their co-operation in the civilian nuclear field to States not parties to the NPT, Restrictive measures, in the field of nuclear cooperation, will help to discourage those States from remaining outside the NPT. 
Progress on this path would make it possible, in particular, to achieve result on the question of the establishment of nuclear weapons and weapons of massive destruction free zone in the Middle East, which remains hostage of the refusal of Israel to accede to the NPT and to put its nuclear installations under IAEA inspections. 
Restrictive measures could also be adopted by the UN Security Council and other relevant U.N. bodies, in order to provide to the question of the universalization of the NPT, as an instrument of international peace and security, the importance and priority it deserves. 
Mr. President, 
Allow me to underline, in third place, that Algeria is also part of this vast majority of States that have chosen to use the atom exclusively for civil applications, including with regards to research/development, in accordance with the provisions of the NPT, in particular its article IV. I would like, in this respect, to reiterate Algeria's support for the mandate of the IAEA in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as well as for all regional and international initiatives aiming at the diversification of scientific cooperation and technical assistance in this field. 
4 

Mr. President, 
Allow me to recall, finally, the initiative of the Algerian Presidency of the Conference on Disarmament, in 2009, which although unanimously approved, has not yet been followed by concrete action, as shown it the results of the last session of the CD in Geneva. But the Conference all Disarmament is not the only multilateral forum that is negatively affected by its own failures. The persistent delays noted in the process of entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the establishment of the Organization of the States Parties in Vienna, are also a source of great concern. 
With regard to the current difficulties, it is the responsibility of the International community to seek ways and means in order to start again the work of the Conference on Disarmament. 
While expressing this hope, I wish every success to the work of this Conference, and thank you for your kind attention. 
5 

