Mr. Chairman
On behalf of the Delegation of Argentina, allow me to congratulate you for your election. We have no doubt that your diplomatic skills will conduct our works with wisdom. You can count on the full cooperation of the argentine Delegation.
Mr. Chairman
Five years ago, States Parties to the NPT had before us a historic opportunity from which we benefited.
Convinced of the need for developing a solid architecture for entering in the XXI Century, we agreed to extend the treaty indefinitely.
There is no doubt that we took the right decision because NPT is the instrument in which is based the international system of non proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
We must continue building on this achievement and the challenge we face today is even bigger.
The maintenance of international peace and security is more complex than in the past. However, that should not be a cause for paralysis but, on the contrary, for great stimulus.
The look backwards
There is no doubt that the political atmosphere in which NPT operates suffered a negative impact due to some negative developments that we all regret and pointed out at the General Debate.
-The actual situation of the nuclear non proliferation system is cause of great concern for Argentina and we judge extremely inconvenient to go backwards in this field.
But there are also some developments that allow us to be optimistic and that we already recognized.
The look forward
Looking backwards, it is clear that the expectations of the non nuclear weapons States regarding the elimination of such weapons have not been balanced with actions in that direction and this is cause of frustration.
30 years ago, NPT negotiators regretted the awful invention of which the human being had been capable.
But it was clear to them that only by regretting they didn't change reality. Only through action, reality can be changed. That visionary negotiators put their inventive minds in service of mankind for something good in benefit for all.
Today, we are here for the same purpose. It is fine that we analyze the past but we cannot stick only to that. We also need to identify steps that will allow us to make progress. Let's put our sight in the future.
Today we can underline the permanent validity of the provisions of the treaty and the need that we all fulfill in good faith the obligations undertaken.
Today we can underline the need that the nuclear weapons States continue with the reductions of their arsenals keeping informed the international community in order to fulfill the obligation under article VI.
Today we can reiterate the validity of the Decisions and Resolution adopted in 1995. In this regard, we hope that CTBT's entry into force and the beginning of negotiations of a Cut Off Treaty, become reality in the near future.
Today we can also reaffirm some aspects in which the treaty needs to be reinforced.
In this context, the Delegation of Argentina wishes to express its support for the Working Paper on Nuclear Disarmament submitted to this Conference by the Delegations of Brazil; Egypt; Ireland; Mexico; New Zealand; Sweden; and South Africa.
During these 4 weeks we will have the opportunity to revise in depth the implementation of the treaty in order to assure that "the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the treaty are being realized" as the treaty itself establishes. This implies in fact to identify future steps.
In this opportunity and in the same way we did through the Declaration of Mercosur, Bolivia and Chile on the 30th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, issued last 27th March, Argentina reiterates its "commitment with NPT as the basis of the international nuclear non proliferation and disarmament regime and the purpose to make all necessary efforts to ensure its full implementation and universality, with the ultimate goal of achieving a nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction free world".
Thank you.



