2012 Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Nan-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
Statement by Australia - AS DELIVERED
Mr Chairman
Not least because of your nationality, the Australian delegation offers sincere
congratulations on your appointment as Chair of this first session of this PrepCom.
You may be assured of our full support in your efforts to make this meeting a success
and to start the new review cycle positively and constructively..
Over forty years since it entered into force, the NPT remains the cornerstone of
international efforts to check the spread of nuclear weapons, to achieve real reductions
in nuclear arsenals globally, and ultimately to realise the goal of a world without
nuclear weapons.
Australia welcomed the substantive consensus outcome of the 201 0 NPT Review
Conference. It is therefore vitally important that all NPT States Parties (including
nuclear-weapon States) work to comprehensively implement the 20 10 Action Plan. In
accordance with Action 20, Australia has submitted to this PrepCom a national report
on our efforts to implement the Action Plan and through it, the NPT itself. We
strongly encourage all NPT States Parties to do likewise.
Mr Chairman
Australia is proud to have joined with nine other countries - Canada, Chile, Germany,
Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates - to
establish the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI).
The NPDI has submitted a number of working papers to the PrepCom, reflecting our
current priorities.
Action 2 1 encouraged the nuclear-weapon States to agree on a standard nuclear
disarmament reporting form. Last year, the NPDI developed a draft standard
disarmament reporting form, as a contribution to their discussions towards meeting
this objective. We have circulated this draft reporting as part of an NPDI working
paper to this PrepCom.
The NPDI has also submitted NPT PrepCom working papers on the universalisation
of the IAEA Additional Protocol and nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
education.
We believe that the best way to ensure full compliance by states of their NPT
safeguards obligations is through their adoption of an Additional Protocol to their
IAEA safeguards agreements. Effective safeguards uphold the right of countries to
access nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, by closing the door on the proliferation
risks associated with the spread of nuclear technology. 
Australia is honoured to chair in Vienna a small group of NPT States Parties that work
together to support review of the Treaty. The 'Vienna Group of 10', as it is known,
has submitted a suite of papers on 'Vienna issues' for consideration by this PrepCom.
We trust that these will assist States Parties in their deliberations.
Mr Chairman
Australia is deeply disappointed by the on-going failure of the Conference on
Disarmament (CD) to adopt a program of work. including in particular the
commencement of negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), which
is a longstanding goal of NPT States Parties. Australia urges all members of the CD
to make all efforts to overcome its now 15 year-old impasse.
NPDI members have submitted a working paper to this PrepCom which, inter alia,
announces a series of scientific experts' meetings, convened by NPDI members this
year, to feed into the CD's consideration of FMCT issues.
Entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) would be a
major step forward for disarmament, particularly in conjunction with an irreversible,
verifiable FMCT. Australia urges all States that have yet to do so to sign and ratify
the CTBT without delay.
Australia congratulates Indonesia on its ratification of the CTBT in February this year.
Indonesia's leadership sets an example for the eight remaining Annex 2 states
required to ratify for the CTBT to enter into force.
Mr Chairman
Australia is a long-standing supporter of nuclear weapon free zones, freely arrived at
by regional states.
Australia therefore welcomed the outcome of the 201 0 Review Conference regarding
the Middle East and urges all relevant states to continue to work constructively
to~vards the convening of a conference this year on the establishment a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
Australia upholds the rights of states to access nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes, within a framework that reduces the risk of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and adheres to the highest standards for nuclear safety and security.
Mr Chairman
On 13 April, the world witnessed the DPRK's attempted rocket launch, in defiance of
UN Security Council (UNSC) resolutions. North Korea's pursuit of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery represents one of the most serious challenges
to international peace and security today.
Australia is also profoundly concerned about the failure of an NPT State Party, Iran,
to abide by relevant UNSC resolutions and its International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) safeguards obligations. We hope that the discussions currently under way 
between Iran and the so-called "P5 Plus 1" countries can produce an outcome that will
meet the legitimate aspirations of Iran and satisfy the global cause of nonproliferation.

B7ithout doubt, the nuclear proliferation challenges we face today are difficult.
However, we also have a unique opportunity now to strengthen the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime for the decades ahead. It is therefore timely for all NPT
States Parties to pursue practical initiatives to uphold the principles the NPT and the
global peace and security it helps create. 
