~=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=L=
AUSTRALIAN MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS E-mail australia@un.int
150 East 42"d Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 • 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.australia-unsc.gov .au
THE NINTH REVIEW OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
28 April 2015
Australian National Statement
Statement by H.E. Gillian Bird
Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Australia to the United Nations
(Check against delivery)
Thank you Ambassador F eroukhi, it is an honour to be given the opportunity
to address this Review Conference on Australia's behalf.
I think we are all acutely aware of the context in which this Review
Conference is taking place. Deteriorating relations between Russia and the
United States and NATO over Ukraine; the continued inability to convene a
conference on a Middle East Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone;
growing frustration among many NPT non-nuclear weapon states at the slow
pace of nuclear disarmament: these complications might lead us to conclude
that prospects for meaningful progress in multilateral arms control are bleak. 
-2-
Nonetheless, there is a broad base of agreement amongst our Governments
about the continuing importance of the NPT; and the relevance of its three
pillars: disarmament; non-proliferation; and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
With good will, we think this Review Conference can make progress under
each of the pillars.
Our membership of the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI) in part gives us this confidence. The NPDI is a broad cross-regional
group of countries with very different views on how to progress nuclear
disarmament. Yet we have still been able to reach consensus in 17 working
papers presented at previous Preparatory Committee meetings; we have also
agreed on a comprehensive working paper containing consensus language
across the three pillars, for possible inclusion in the RevCon outcomes
document.
We are encouraged also by the announcement on 2"d April that the E3+ 3 and
Iran have established the parameters of a possible agreement to address
international concerns about Iran's nuclear program, although there remain
many details yet to be addressed.
Madam President, for Australia a core objective at the Review Conference
is to preserve and strengthen the NPT and the norms it enshrines as the
cornerstone of multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation. For 45 years
this Treaty has provided important security and welfare benefits to all States.
Our collective commitment to the Treaty has prevented a global nuclear
arms race and contained the proliferation of nuclear weapons. It has
strengthened the ''taboo" against nuclear weapons use in conflict and has
established as a powerful norm that we are working towards the elimination
of nuclear weapons. 
- 3 -
The NPT has also enabled the international community to benefit from the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technologies, including in human health,
agriculture and food security, water and the environment. Australia is a
strong supporter of the IAEA' s work in spreading the peaceful benefits of
nuclear technology to all States. We are a leader in the use of low enriched
uranium for producing medical isotopes, thus minimising stocks of highly
enriched uranium and reducing the associated proliferation risks.
We also contribute to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Program, and we
have provided in-kind and financial support for the Peaceful Uses Initiative
(PUI). In this regard I am very pleased to announce that this year the
Australian Government will make an additional voluntary contribution to the
PUI of 350,000 Euros. Of this amount 250,000 Euros will go towards
supporting the redevelopment of the IAEA' s Seibersdorf laboratories; and
100,000 Euros will go towards PUI projects in the Asia-Pacific.
Madam President, a growing number of States have expressed frustration
at the slow pace of nuclear disarmament. These frustrations have led some
to call for a treaty banning nuclear weapons. But our view is that it is
important to address the security concerns that lead states to develop nuclear.
weapons, and to engage the countries with nuclear weapons to persuade
them to get rid of them. Australia stands for practical, realistic measures to
achieve actual nuclear disarmament. We will elaborate on this view- which
is shared by a significant number of states - in a separate statement on the
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons. 
-4-
Australia, like many States, is concerned that 45 years since the NPT entered
into force some 16,000 nuclear warheads still exist. We remain concerned
that some States continue to produce weapons-grade uranium and
plutonium, although we acknowledge that a number of nuclear weapon
states have declared moratoria on the production of fissile material. We are
concerned that some States are developing new, small, battlefield scale
nuclear weapons.
It will be important that this Review Conference looks forward at practical
ways to implement our commitments under the Treaty and the 2010 Action
Plan. We must focus on concrete steps such as the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; commencing negotiations for a Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty; and developing robust techniques for verifying
disarmament and the dismantlement of nuclear weapons. And we must
continue to ensure that safeguards regimes remain strong and adequately
resourced as these underpin our non-proliferation efforts.
Only steps such as these will make a real difference in leading us towards a
world where nuclear technology is used only for peaceful purposes.
Thank you Madam President. 