
SLOVENIA
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY !
Statement by
 H.E. Mr. Andrej Benedejčič
Permanent Representative of Slovenia to the International Organizations in Vienna
and Head of Delegation
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Mr. Chairperson, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me start by congratulating Ambassador Van der Kwast for assuming
the role of the Chairperson of the first Preparatory Committee meeting of
the 2020 NPT Review Conference and wish him all success in his
endeavors.
As member of the European Union, Slovenia supports the statement
delivered earlier by Ambassador Jacek Bylica, the EEAS Principal
Adviser and Special Envoy for Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
In addition, I would like to make several remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. Chairperson,
Slovenia is a strong supporter of non-proliferation and disarmament of
nuclear weapons. We are committed to treaty-based nuclear
disarmament and arms control and advocate universal adherence to
and full implementation of all non-proliferation and disarmament
treaties and conventions.
We are of firm belief that we have to achieve our common goal of the
world free of nuclear weapons progressively through the full
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). For Slovenia the NPT remains the cornerstone of 
disarmament, non-proliferation and development of nuclear energy
applications for peaceful purposes.
In 2010 NPT Review Conference we have agreed on the step-by-step
Action plan with practical measures also in the area of disarmament to
which we are all committed.
Slovenia has supported resolutions and activities focused on delivering
concrete, tangible results that are related to progressive disarmament.
These include nuclear test ban (CTBT), transparency in the area of
ballistic missiles (HCoC), nuclear disarmament verification, banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons (FMCT), decreasing
the operational readiness of nuclear weapons, as well as establishing
and maintaining nuclear weapons free zones (NWFZ).
We believe that significant progress has been made in all these areas
and we encourage all nuclear weapon states to participate in these
initiatives. In our view, effective, verifiable and irreversible nuclear
disarmament requires not only appropriate technical and security
conditions, but also an active engagement of states that possess nuclear
weapons. This is also why we think that immediate negotiations for a
legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons will not
contribute to achieving this noble goal, to which my country is fully
committed.
Mr. Chairperson,
As one of only thirty states with an operating nuclear power reactor,
Slovenia attaches great importance to the work of the IAEA. This is
clearly demonstrated through our current membership in its Board of
Governors, already third such engagement since becoming an IAEA
member 25 years ago. We therefore welcome the significant
contribution of the Agency to the implementation of NPT.
We also commend the role of the IAEA in ensuring Iran's on-going
implementation of its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. This is essential to ensure international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We believe that we should continue with our efforts to engage the DPRK.
Its constructive dialogue with the international community is essential for
achieving complete and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula. We strongly condemn DPRK's illegal nuclear tests and 
ballistic missile launches. It should refrain from them and immediately
comply with its international obligations. Syria should also resolve all the
outstanding issues and adhere to the Additional Protocol. Together with
the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement it constitutes an effective
verification standard.
Mr. Chairperson,
Slovenia is concerned with the risk of non-state actors acquiring
WMD's. We have been therefore supporting UNSC resolution 1540 and
the work of the 1540 Committee to strengthen global capacity to prevent,
detect, and respond to the use of WMD for terrorist purposes.
We understand that nuclear security remains the responsibility of
states. We thus strongly support international cooperation in this area to
effectually cope with serious challenges both on the global and national
levels. In this context we have recently joined the Nuclear Security
Contact Group, which aims to facilitate cooperation and strengthen
activities on nuclear security. As a country whose experts were deeply
engaged in the process of preparation of the Amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (aCPPNM),
we warmly welcome its recent entry into force, and underline
the importance of its universalization and full implementation.
Mr. Chairperson,
In the IAEA Board of Governors we follow closely our priority areas
which are nuclear energy, nuclear safety and technical assistance.
Slovenia supports the Agency in its discharge of statutory obligations of
offering technical assistance in its area of work, regardless the big
differences in the needs of Member states. Slovenia is always open to
share its experience with others and is interested in improving its own
capabilities. This kind of capacity building is vital for any country dealing
with nuclear technology. We welcome and support the Agency's
contribution to the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Chairperson,
In conclusion, Slovenia will continue to contribute to the implementation
of the NPT and its measures and Action plan in the best possible way. In
this context, and also because of our more active role within the IAEA,
this year's Bled Strategic Forum, an annual international gathering in 
Slovenia, will also feature a panel on Global Nuclear Governance. [I
would like to thank Director General Amano and Executive Secretary Dr.
Zerbo for confirming their participation at the event.] We are looking
forward to a very productive and interesting discussion.
Mr. Chairperson,
We will contribute to constructive discussions in the next days that will
hopefully lead us to a successful 2020 NPT Rev Con.
Thank you.