check against delivery
Statement of Secretary General
for European and International Affairs of Austria
H.E. Johannes Kyrle
First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
30 April 2012
Mr. Chairman,
distinguished delegates,
1) At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Ambassador
Woolcott on your election as chair of this conference. You can
count on the full support of the Austrian delegation.
2) Let me also say how satisfied we are that the new NPT review
cycle starts in Vienna. The NPT pillars are represented prominently
in Vienna, through the presence of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization. The focus of Vienna-based delegations on nuclear
issues today is also higher than ever before. It is logical that the
NPT has a stop in Vienna to profit from the expertise assembled
here. We can now also draw on services and input from the newly
established Vienna office of the UN-Office of Disarmament
Affairs (UNODA) as well as the Vienna Centre for Disarmament
and Non-proliferation (VCDNP) that I had announced as Austrian
initiatives two years ago. Both offices have started operating with
substantial Austrian support and are providing important
contributions to our work.
Mr. Chairman,
3) We are starting this review cycle with some wind in our sails
coming from the successful Review Conference in 2010. The fact
that the entire NPT membership was able to agree on a forward- 
looking Action Plan is no small accomplishment - a sign that the
NPT is still the cornerstone of the international nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. Nevertheless, we need
to recognize that this regime continues to face serious challenges
that need to be addressed with urgency.
4) Let me highlight what these key challenges for the NPT are in
our view:
i. The confidence in the NPT and the wider regime as a credible
means to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be
strengthened.
The NPT has served us well in the past 40 years. The number of
states possessing nuclear weapons has not spiralled out of control
as feared in the 1960s. However, India, Israel and Pakistan, have
remained outside of the NPT. North Korea abused its NPT
membership to develop a nuclear weapons program and there have
been several clandestine nuclear weapons programs in other
countries.
Today, the most challenging issue related to the non-proliferation
credibility of the NPT, however, relates to the Iranian nuclear
program and the concerns of the international community as to its
nature. Finding a peaceful and diplomatic solution for this issue is
of paramount importance. I would like to appeal to Iran to use the
promising recent restart of E3/EU + 3 talks to do its utmost to
address the concerns of the international community about the
nature of its nuclear program. While Iran's rights under the NPT
are undisputed, all open questions need to be solved in a
transparent manner and in full cooperation with the IAEA. All
NPT member states have a vested interest that this issue is resolved
in a way that strengthens the nuclear disarmament and non- 
proliferation regime. In this context, I would like to recall that
Austria has always advocated the universal application of the best
current verification standards. This would help us avoid future
pro1 iferation concerns.
ii. The second key challenge for the NPT concerns nuclear
disarmament:
In our view, this review cycle will determine whether the NPT is a
credible framework for nuclear disarmament. The forward looking
action plan would, if implemented, put us on a right track towards
a world without nuclear weapons. Policies by all NPT states need
to be fully compatible with this objective. This must include taking
steps to diminish the role and significance of nuclear weapons in
all military and security concepts, doctrines and policies. Important
transparency commitments by nuclear weapons states need to be
fulfilled. The CTBT needs to be brought into force or at least
significantly closer to this goal. Further progress on bilateral USRussia
negotiations is expected. Multilateral disarmament
negotiations need to be initiated, such as on an FMCT, and serious
multilateral processes needs to be started on other important
nuclear disarmament issues.
The integrity of the NPT hinges on a credible - I underline credible
- process towards implementation. Many NPT states remember the
13 steps that were agreed in 2000 and soon forgotten. Words must
be matched with and action. I am hopeful that we will see such
action.
Nuclear weapon states have the prime responsibility for nuclear
disarmament, but Article 6 is in the interest of - and also an
obligation of - all States party to the NPT. The action plan reflects
this by listing many actions that can and should be undertaken by 
all. Austria will contribute to these follow-on actions. We will
report on as many actions as possible and encourage all states to do
the same. Let us use this action plan as a tool for implementation
and a focussed debate and assess where we stand in 2015.
iii. The 3rd key challenge for the NPT concerns the Middle East
as a Zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems.
The decision for a conference in 20 12 was the first important step.
The designation of Finland as host and of Under Secretary of State
Laajeva as facilitator for this process was the second. I am
impressed by the energy, commitment and optimism with which
the Finnish team addresses their very challenging mandate. The
states of the region now need to take the third step and use the
services offered by Finland to the fullest. Now they are offered a
framework to start a process that could help them fulfil their
dreams for peace, disarmament and cooperation in the region. It is
up to them to seize this opportunity. It is in the interest of us all
that this process is credible and successful. Austria - and I am sure
all other States - will also offer support whenever possible.
Mr. Chairman,
5) The European Union is contributing to the conference with
statements and working papers, which Austria fully endorses.
However, the special Austrian position as regards nuclear energy is
well known. We consider the generation of electricity through
nuclear fission neither sustainable nor safe, and not a viable avenue
in the combat of climate change. Austria has therefore renounced
the use of nuclear power in its national energy mix. All the same,
Austria fully respects the rights of all states to peaceful uses of
nuclear energy as enshrined in the NPT. These rights, however, 
bring with them certain responsibilities and obligations. The
accident at the Fukushima nuclear power plant has reminded us all
not to be complacent, but to universally apply the strictest possible
standards of nuclear safety and security.
Mr. Chairman,
6) Anything produced by humans is fallible. Fukushima is a case
in point for Murphy's Law. Eventually something that can go
wrong also goes wrong. This principle applies to nuclear weapons
too. Humanity has been very lucky to get through the bipolar Cold
War without nuclear weapons being used. With potentially ever
rising numbers of nuclear armed states, the odds are not very
encouraging.
7) The logic of nuclear disarmament will ultimately prevail. The
question is whether it will happen through a rational, serious
political effort by the international community or as a result of a
cataclysmic event. How we deal with nuclear weapons is a litmustest
for the international community. It will clarify whether we are
capable to resolve a fundamental challenge to our very existence
through international cooperation.
8) This is what is at stake in the NPT. It requires the urgent
cooperation of all States. We face serious challenges, but this is
also a time of opportunity. I am convinced that the challenges can
be met if the "silent majority" of States committed to
multilateralism makes itself heard. We must move beyond the
divisions and entrenched positions that have made substantive
multilateral progress on disarmament and non-proliferation issues
difficult. We need to change the discourse on nuclear weapons
from a narrow security perspective and work together with civil
society - and for our societies. A world free of nuclear weapons is a 
shared goal of all of humanity. We must achieve this goal not just
for ourselves, but also for the younger generations. They are
watching us, they depend on us. We have to give them hope for
peace and a sustainable future.
Mr. Chairman, distinguished delegates,
In this spirit, I would like to welcome you all here in Vienna and
wish us all a productive and successful conference.
Thank you 