Thank you Mr. Chairman,
I would like, at the beginning, to congratulate you on the election to chair this first session of the Preparatory Review Conference and I will assure you that you will have our delegations full support. We look forward to working with you and all the distinguished delegates to ensure that this meeting will be a first step towards a successful Review Conference in 2010,
Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to attend this First Session of the Preparatory Committee, as we look towards the 2010 NPT Review Conference and begin the important steps necessary to ensure a successful Review in 2010 that meets the goals and spirit of the Treaty.
It is important to recognize that the 2005 Review Conference did not achieve the success we would have wanted, and that there are urgent and pressing challenges, in particular in the fields of non-proliferation and disarmament, that the international community must tackle with honesty and determination.
We therefore welcome to this preparatory meeting as an opportunity to work together to identify the means by which we can progress towards the full implementation of the NPT,
The authors of the Treaty rightly recognized the existence and spread of nuclear weapons as one of the most dangerous threats to global peace and security. Today, this threat is if anything even greater that in 1968, with the truly alarming possibility of nuclear weapons being obtained by non-sate actors, or destabilizing vital regions of the world.
The objectives of the NPT are therefore more relevant today than ever, and it is incumbent upon us to ensure that the 2010 NPT Review Conference is successful in renewing and reaffirming the commitment of NPT states to disarmament and non-proliferation to achieve these goals.
Mr. Chairman,
The Kingdom of Bahrain, party to the NPT since 1988, has long been committed to the principles of the non-proliferation and disarmament regime, and views the NPT as the core of this international framework. We therefore call, once again, on all the countries of the world, without exception, to become parties to, and fully comply with the NPT.
In particular, Bahrain is concerned at the possible spread of nuclear weapons to the Middle East and the Gulf region. The existence of such weapons in the region is a seriously destabilizing factor, which threatens not only the countries and peoples of the region, but also the entire globai economic system. Bahrain has therefore repeatedly called for the Middle East to be a zone free of nuclear weapons, in which all countries are party to. and fully compliant with, the NPT, and has fully supported General Assembly resolutions with this aim.
We repeat that call today and, within this framework, call upon Israel to accede to the NPT and place all its nuclear facilities under the full scope of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards. It is the Kingdom's firm belief that accession would enhance peace and security in the region which is vital towards the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
At the same time, Bahrain recognizes the rights of states o the peaceful civilian use of nuclear energy, within the parameters of international standards and the provisions of the NPT. Trust is the key to maintaining security and stability in regions where nuclear energy is being used or developed, and this trust must be based on full openness and transparency with regard to nuclear programmes.
Bahrain therefore calls once again on all countries to live up to their NPT obligations, and to cooperate fully with the IAEA and the international community with regard to nuclear issues and inspection of nuclear programmes. Such measures can only enhance international trust, to the benefit of all concerned.
Mr. Chairman,
Once again, may I underline Bahrain's desire to see the 2010 NPT Review-Conference be successful, and our commitment to the aims and obligations of the Treaty.