O Belarus considers the NPT as a key element not only of a nuclear non-proliferation regime but also of the system of international security as a whole. Preservation of due balance between the three interdependent pillars of the NPT - disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy - is a guarantee of successful implementation of the treaty.
O Belarus made a historic choice of renouncing voluntarily the possession of nuclear weapons at her
disposal, withdrew them from her territory and has been confirming her non-proliferation commitments by practical deeds. Belarus considers the goal of complete nuclear disarmament as the main strategic aim of the treaty. Belarus supports realistic, considerate and step-by-step approaches in nuclear disarmament.
O We welcome the signing of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty between Russia and US on April 8, 2010. At the same time we are convinced that disarmament process should not only include the destruction of outdated nuclear warheads and their carriers but also consider obligations for termination of development of nuclear weapons.
o One of the important prerequisites for the progress in disarmament is implementation of the CTBT and continued negotiations on the FMCT. During her chairmanship of the Disarmament Conference (Geneva, February- March 2010), Belarus made a special effort to coordinate the schedule of work for the FMCT negotiations.
o Provision of unequivocal and unconditional security assurances is a pledge of trust and predictability in international relations and a prerequisite for the enhanced effectiveness of the NPT. We count on a constructive approach to negotiations on universal, comprehensive and legally binding document providing security assurances to the non-nuclear states in accordance with the decisions of the 1995 NPT Review Conference.
O Belarus is dedicated to her international non-proliferation obligations in accordance with the IAEA regulations and control mechanisms.
o The NPT clearly guarantees the inalienable right of the states for peaceful nuclear programmes under the condition of non-proliferation. Belarus is interested in complete and non-discriminatory realization of this right.
O Belarus supports the multilateralisation of the nuclear fuel cycle as this would decrease proliferation risks, establish fuel security and provide all interested parties with economically attractive access to nuclear fuel. In this regard, Belarus draws attention to the Belarusian-Russian working document on international cooperation in nuclear energy field (NPT/CONF.2010AWP.22).
o Proliferation of nuclear weapons, fissile materials and technologies in the face of growing threat of nuclear terrorism is one of the most serious challenges to global security and stability. Belarus believes that an effective way to counter these threats lies through consolidation of efforts of the international community.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



