PERMANENT MISSION OF -
THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
TO THE INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATZONS IN VIENNA
FISRT SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Statement by H.E. Ambassador
Valery Voronetsky, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Belarus
Vienna, 30 April 2012
Check again~st dehe 
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me on behalf of the Delegation of the Republic of Belarus to
congratulate you upon the election to the post of the Chairman of the First Session
of the Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference. I am confident that under your leadership the current session of the
NPT Preparatory Committee will be able to provide a solid basis for the success of
the 20 15 Review Conference.
Our delegation associates itself with the statement made by Ambassador of
Egypt on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States Parties.
Mr. Chairman,
Over more than 40 years the NPT has been a fundamental element of the
international security and non-proliferation. A balanced promotion of all three
pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and the right to peaceful use of atomic
energy - is a necessary precondition for strengthening the authority of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Belarus was the first to renounce voluntarily and unconditionally the
possession of nuclear weapons left on its territory after the break up of the Soviet
Union. Removal of the nuclear arsenal was accompanied with reduction of
conventional arms and total number of the Armed forces in accordance with the
regional obligations. That process went on under severe economic conditions caused
by collapse of the Soviet Union and consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.
Confirming our full commitments to the obligations under the NPT, we call
upon not to lose sight of the strategic goal of the NPT - nuclear disarmament.
We welcome the start of implementation in 20 11 by Russia and the United
States of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty which was signed in Prague in 2010.
No doubts that this Treaty has already contributed to strengthening international
security and strategic stability. At the same time, we are confident that future
measures to reduce strategic nuclear weapons and means of delivery should
envisage not only destruction of obsolete nuclear warheads and means of their
delivery, but also commitments to stop further development of new types of nuclear
weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
Obviously, political will, the so called 'reloading7 was a vital factor for the
conclusion of the new START Treaty. Multilateral nuclear disarmament is a more
complex process, but yet not less important for peace, security and wellbeing. In
this regard, we need 'reloading' of the multilateral diplomatic mechanism in the
sphere of disarmament. Thus, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva should
conclude a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty, the ripe well issue. The conclusion of this
Treaty could become a considerable collective contribution to the implementation of
the commitments under Article VI of the NPT.
We are confident that the outlined headway in bringing into force the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty must be supplemented with continuing
ratifications by the States listed in Annex I1 to the Treaty. We believe that only a
universal legal international obligation can be a reliable barrier for testing of nuclear
explosive devices all around the world.
Mr. Chairman,
Belarus holds firm position on the issues of strengthening of the
non-proliferation regime. With the existence of terrorists' threat in the modern 
world the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear related materials and
technologies is a major challenge to the international security and stability. Such
challenges require consolidation of efforts from the international community,
including consistent and indiscriminate cooperation in counteracting nuclear
terrorism and securing nuclear material.
We highly appreciate the role and positive input of the IAEA and its Director
General Mr. Yukiya Amano in strengthening the international nuclear nonproliferation
regime. In this regard our country attaches great importance to the
improvement of the IAEA safeguards system based on the provisions of the NPT.
Universality of the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the
Convention Against Nuclear Terrorism, and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism could greatly contribute to decreasing the non-proliferation risks.
We acknowledge the role of the international export control regimes in this process,
such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee. Belarus stands
for increasing the role of these regimes in the global non-proliferation system.
Mr. Chairman,
In the framework of the NPT review process specific role belongs to the issue
of the security assurances. Acquiring legally binding security assurances by the
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States brings trust and predictability in the relations among
the countries, contributes to strengthening of nuclear non-proliferation regime and
promotes the universality of the Treaty.
Lack of progress on this area causes the cascade of problems in the sphere of
nuclear nonproliferation, dilutes basis and spirit of the NPT. The assurances
contained in the United Nations Security Council resolutions 255 (1968) and 984
(1995) are mere political declarations by their nature. Furthermore, the assurances
include reservations, in fact repudiating the declarations and improving the
significance and prestige of possession of nuclear weapons.
The necessity to conclude a global legally binding international arrangement
providing unequivocal and unconditional assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states
against use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is ripe well. We believe that these
assurances should be given to the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States Parties to the NPT.
As it is known, Action 7 of the Plan of Action on Nuclear Disarmament
contains recommendation to the Conference on Disarmament to begin without delay
a discussion of effective international arrangements to assure the Non-NuclearWeapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, with a
possibility of developing an international legally binding document.
We stand for reestablishment in the CD of a special committee or a working
group to discuss and then to develop an international arrangement on assurances
to the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
Mr. Chairman,
In the context of the NPT, we attach particular importance to the trilateral
assurances which were provided to Belarus under the Budapest Memorandum of
1994 in exchange for the voluntary renunciation by our country of the possibility to
possess the nuclear weapons and acceding to the NPT as a Non-Nuclear-Weapon
State. The Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States
committed themselves to respecting independence and sovereignty of the Republic
of Belarus, in particular, not to exert any economic pressure on our country.
After the termination of the 1991 START Treaty which the Republic of Belarus
was a State Party to, these conditions have become especially important to us. In
particular, we welcomed the joint statement by the Russian Federation and the 
United States which confirmed that the assurances fixed in the Budapest
Memorandum would stay in force after 4 December 2009 - the date of termination
of the first START Treaty. We noted with satisfaction that Action 8 of the Plan of
Action on Nuclear Disarmament obliged the nuclear-weapon States to fully respect
their existing commitments with regard to security assurances to non-nuclearweapon
States.
Therefore we face the question: why, despite the fixed and repeatedly
confirmed obligations, some nuclear-weapon States in practice ignore their
commitments and resort to economic and political pressure on States which
adopted a non-nuclear status in due time?
Mr. Chairman,
While comprehensively reviewing the NPT, we should remember that
safeguarding exclusively peaceful use of nuclear technologies is one of the
important objectives of the non-proliferation regime.
Nowadays we are witnessing increased attention to the development of
peaceful nuclear technologies in various spheres, including energy production,
healthcare, agriculture, environment protection, etc. The number of countries
interested in developing national nuclear programmes is growing.
We are confident that the IAEA has all necessary tools to enable equal and
indiscriminate access to all interested countries to nuclear energy benefits. Many of
these tools already exist and should be accessible for the purposes of development.
At the same time any State while pursuing its peaceful nuclear programme should
act transparently and in accordance to the letter and spirit of its obligations under
the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
The issue of promotion of the NPT universality is acute today as never before.
We remain concerned with lack of progress in this regard, given that some States
that operate non-safeguarded nuclear facilities remain outside of the NPT.
In the course of the current review process due attention should be paid to
regional aspects of the NPT implementation, notably, establishment of nuclearweapon-free
zones. Success in realization of this task will undoubtedly strengthen
the non-proliferation regime and contribute to nuclear disarmament. Stability in the
Middle East is important for both regional and international security. Hence,
establishment in this region of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction is a
priority of the current review process.
It is also important to ensure a full value and effective functioning of the
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia, which requires signing and ratification of
the Protocol by all five nuclear-weapon States.
In conclusion let me express hope that in the course of the current review
process we will adhere to a flexible and rational approach to be able to reach a
compromise on all issues related to the implementation of the Treaty, which in turn
will provide a new impetus to the NPT and strengthen the global non-proliferation
regime. From our side we will cooperate in a constructive manner to reach this
compromise.
Thank you for your attention. 