Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United Nations and Other
International Organizations in Geneva
General Statement
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Second session, Geneva, 23.04-04.05 2018
Mr. Chairman,
Let me congratulate you upon the assumption of your function and assure
you of my delegation’s full support. Belgium aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the EU and with the statement on the progressive
approach made by the representative of Australia. Allow me to make the
following national points. In the interest of time, I will not dwell on important
subjects tackled in the aforementioned declarations and which we fully
endorse, such as the need for an FMCT or the issue of nuclear disarmament
verification.
Faced with an increasingly complex security environment and lackluster
progress on nonproliferation issues, it is easy to be dismissive of the
prospect of this review process scoring any breakthrough. After all, the
review conference of 2015 did not end well. Since the end of that conference
the DPRK has conducted 3 new nuclear tests and launched numerous
missiles. The nuclear deal with Iran is currently under risk of unraveling.
Last year’s negotiations on a nuclear ban treaty was testimony to the
heightened polarization within the non-proliferation community. All these
setbacks happened against the backdrop of the reemergence of the “Great
Power competition.”
However, reluctance to meaningfully engage in this review process is not the
answer to the multiple challenges we face. The grave security situation and 
the confrontation between some of the nuclear weapon states have rendered
progress on the disarmament field more difficult. Progress is still possible,
though it will not be achieved through a divisive process. Nor will new
initiatives automatically lead to results. For there is no lack of action plans,
but a lack of action itself.
The action plan agreed at the review conference in 2010 still offers a firm
footing for progress in all three clusters of the NPT. There is never an
inappropriate time to discuss nuclear risk reduction. Measures to prevent
accidental or unauthorized use have to be taken. Wherever possible, nuclear
weapons should be taken off high alert. Some nuclear weapon states, such
as the US, have made great strides in increasing transparency on their
nuclear arsenal and doctrine. European nuclear weapon states have
decreased their stockpiles and delivery systems. We are waiting for other
states to follow suit.
Mr. Chairman,
International norms are not created overnight. They demand sustained
political will and need to be underpinned by legal instruments. Only one
country still violates the international taboo against nuclear tests. It is one
exception too much. Moreover, voluntary moratoria on nuclear testing do
not ensure a permanent and fully verifiable legal norm. We need the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to enter into force. States should
not wait for others to join the Treaty. Whether or not they belong to Annex
II, all states should undertake the necessary political and legal steps making
adherence possible. Only through an increased support to the CTBT can we
pave the way towards a world free of nuclear tests, including in the DPRK.
Pledges to refrain from nuclear tests are a welcome but insufficient step.
This commitment should become legally binding and verifiable through full
and unconditional adherence to the CTBT.
Creating international norms is not sufficient. They have to be verified and
non-compliance should not remain without consequence. The Chemical
Weapons Convention serves as a grim reminder that even an almost
universally accepted norm that is verified by an international organization
can suffer erosion when states parties refuse to play by the rules.
Mr. Chairman,
For decades, the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) has been
a linchpin of European security. Though most European states are not party
to this Treaty, all of them benefit from the protection it offers. The continued
compliance with this Treaty is therefore of critical importance. We call upon
Russia to continue the dialogue with the US to address the concerns raised
by its development of a new missile system. Current issues regarding the
INF have to be tackled in a way that preserves this crucial Treaty. We also
express the hope that the protection against the threat of intermediaterange
missiles Europe currently enjoys can one day be extended to other
continents of the world.
Mr. Chairman,
The benefits of the peaceful use of the atom are manifold. Beyond providing
an energy source, the atom can also combat malicious insects or sterilize
food products. In the field of cancer therapy, the role that medical
radioisotopes play remains irreplaceable. As a world market leader in the
production of medical radioisotopes, Belgium shall continue to take all
measures to ensure uninterrupted delivery to the millions of patients who
rely on them for diagnosis and treatment.
The full range of peaceful nuclear applications should remain accessible to all
states. Nuclear technology has not reached its full potential yet, especially in
developing states. Therefore, Belgium applauds the important role the
International Atomic Energy Agency is playing, notably through its Technical
Cooperation Fund.
However, benefits should be paired with responsibilities. The IAEA should be
able to use the full toolset to control each state’s nuclear programme and to
detect any possible diversion to a weapons programme. This requires a
comprehensive safeguards agreement, coupled with an Additional Protocol.
The “golden standard” may pose a certain burden on states, but this cannot
be an excuse to any state for not accepting the full-spectrum guarantee of
the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
*********************