PERMANENT MISSION OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
STATEMENT
by
Mr Mirza Pa8ic, Counsellor
to the Permanent Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the United Nations
atthe
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPn
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
New York, April 27, 2015
PERMANENT MISSION OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
420 LEXINTON AVENUE, SUITE 607, NEW YORK, NY 10170-TEL (212)751-9015-FAX(212)751-9019 
Madam President,
On behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I would like to extend our deepest condolences to the
Government and people of Nepal, over the catastrophic earthquake which caused a tragic loss
of human lives and enormous material damage.
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, for being elected as the President of the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). We believe that under your able leadership we will successfully accomplish the work
ahead of us, and please be assured of full cooperation of my delegation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union
and I will make some additional remarks in national capacity.
Madam President,
Bosnia and Herzegovina understands that nuclear weapons stay a big challenge for global
peace, which can be stable only with full control of arms of massive destruction. We welcome
the progress made in the past, but Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the opinion that it is
necessary to take new, concrete steps in order to prevent spreading of nuclear weapons around
the world. International community should be more united in the idea to build a safe and more
secure world.
Regardless of obstacles and delays within the last five years, we belive that the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties is a good opportunity for real progress in non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. As long as the nuclear arsenals exist, the states anticipate them as the danger for their
stability and security and the NPT Review Conference offers an opportunity to firmly reaffirm
the commitment of all State Parties, to arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports transparent and open nuclear non-proliferation negotiations,
which need to be in good faith. Furthermore, for nuclear disarmament, greater trust between
involved parties is essential. The role of nuclear weapons in military doctrine should be
reduced. We believe that in situations where conflicts threatening regional and global stability
exist, the best solution for resolving these issues would be through diplomatic means and
negotiations, which will result in increase of mutual trust, necessary for nuclear disarmament.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the positive results of negotiations on the Iranian issue that
have been reached on April 2nd in Lausanne. It is a significant contribution to global stability
and it will serve as an example of diplomatic and peaceful solution concerning security issues
for future generations. We express our hope that details of the agreement will be completed by
June this year. 
Madam President,
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports international efforts to ensure the universality of the NPT as
a goal in promotion of security and prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
world. Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in
1994. We ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 2005. We call upon all State
Parties to work in a spirit of compromise and flexibility in order to reach a constructive
outcome regarding three main pillars of the NPT: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful
use of nuclear energy.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country without nuclear facilities and we have no future plans of
building any. However, some types of ionizing radiation sources are used in the country,
mostly in medicine and in smaller volume in industry, agriculture and other fields. Bosnia and
Herzegovina fully supports the work and mission of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and will continue to be engaged actively, both as a member state and as a member of
IAEA's Board of Governors. To make the sources safe and secure for our citizens, we fully
cooperate with the IAEA in the field of technical assistance, education, training and passing the
regulations that are in compliance with the European Union legislation. In 2007, Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted the Act on Radiation and Nuclear Safety, which regulates the system of
control over the sources of ionizing radiation, protection of people and the environment from
exposure to ionizing radiation.
Madam President,
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to contribute to the international
efforts to reach, step by step, the world without nuclear weapons, promoting international
cooperation, stability, peace and security.
I thank you, Madam President 