Mr, President,
At the outset, please allow me to express to you my warmest congratulations on your election as the President of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
This year the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Conference comes at the time when nuclear regime is in a state of crisis and when concrete steps need to be taken in order to curb proliferation efforts around the word.
Today, 40 years after signing the Treaty, nuclear weapons and their proliferation pose unbearable threat and yet there are thousands of nuclear warheads in the arsenals throughout the world. Since 2000 we have observed a rollback in efforts to reduce nuclear arsenals and their role in security policy. Deep divisions and disagreement between the States Parties over the main principles of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty unfortunately resulted in failure of the 2005 NPT Review Conference.
Despite all the setbacks in past decade, the most recent initiatives gave new momentum towards realistic progress in the process of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In this particular context, we would like to refer to the Resolution 1887/2009 unanimously adopted during the United Nations Security Council Meeting at the level of Heads of States and Government, held in September 2009. This resolution reaffirmed the commitment of the countries to seek safer world and create conditions for the world free of nuclear weapons, in accordance with the main principles of the NPT.
Mr. President,
In addition, we are encouraged by the successful conclusion of negotiations of the new START agreement between the United States and Russian Federation. This presents a clear commitment of the major nuclear powers towards further reduction of their nuclear arsenals. Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that the nuclear disarmament can only encourage State Parties to comply with their obligations towards the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty.
Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the outcome of the Nuclear Summit held in Washington D.C. last month with the aim of highlighting the global threat posed by nuclear terrorism and a need to secure the nuclear material and prevent illicit nuclear trafficking,
Mr. President,
Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the NPT as a unique and irreplaceable multilateral instrument for maintenance of international peace, security and stability. Therefore, the NPT Review Conference of 2010 presents an opportunity to renew the commitments for States Parties to the main principles of the NPT regime.
As a State Party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to implementing the Treaty and stands ready to contribute to the international efforts to ensure its universality as a long term goal in promotion of security and prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world.
We call upon all States Parties to work in a spirit of compromise and flexibility in order to reach a constructive outcome regarding three main pillars of the NPT: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Bosnia and Herzegovina is entirely convinced that these three pillars are mutually reinforcing and that they must be equally considered.
We would like to emphasize the importance of nuclear disarmament and support programs for destruction and elimination of nuclear weapons. In this regard, the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones presents a positive step towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament.
Bosnia and Herzegovina maintain the view that all States Parties have the right to use nuclear energy for the peaceful purposes. However, States Parties need to adhere to all NPT obligations under the international instruments crafted to ensure that the most powerful, yet most devastating source of energy so far, is indeed used in safe and responsible manner. We strongly believe that that the implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreements and their verification by the IAEA, remains reliable instrument to that extent. Over the period of its existence IAEA has proven itself as a reliable, impartial and efficient international supervisor of the nuclear safeguard.Mr. President,
Allow me to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the preparatory work ahead of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Nuclear Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We sincerely hope that the spirit of cooperation will guide us through the NPT Review Conference and create the environment in which the States Parties, while reiterating their commitment to the main principles of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty will be able to move us a step closer to building an improved collective security in 21st Century.
In conclusion, I would like to express my hope that the participants in the committee deliberations will find strength, courage and wisdom required today more than ever before to constructively and successfully deal with the pressing nuclear disarmament and proliferation challenges that have come plaguing our planet and humankind.
Thank You,









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



