Mr. Chairmen, Distinguished delegates, 
May I congratulate you, Mr. Chairman on your appointment, and assure you the support of delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Mr. Chairmen, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina understands that the nuclear weapons stay a big challenge for global peace, which can be stable only with full control of arms for massive destruction, particularly nuclear weapons. We welcome progress made in the past, but Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the opinion that it is necessary to take new, concrete steps on disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. International community should be more united in the idea to build safe and more secure world. 
Regardless of obstacles and delays over the past decade, we expect that the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties should be good opportunity for real progress in non proliferation of nuclear weapons. As long as the nuclear arsenals exist, the states anticipate them as the danger for their stability and security. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports transparent, open nuclear non-proliferation negotiation, which need to be in good faith. Furthermore, for the nuclear disarmament more trust is essential between involved parties. The role of nuclear weapons in military doctrines should be reduced. We believe, that in situation when conflicts threatening regional and global stability, the best solution for resolving the issues would be through diplomatic means and negotiations, which will resulted in more mutual trust necessary for nuclear disarmament. 
Mr. Chairman, 
We stand ready to contribute to international efforts to ensure universality of NPT in promotion of security and prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons in the world. Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) on 15 August 1994 as the successor of the former SFRY. As a State Party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which is important legal instrument and cornerstone of nuclear control, Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to implementing the Treaty. 
The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted Decision on Ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, in its 815t session, held on October 26, 2005. We call upon all States Parties to work in a spirit of compromise and flexibility in order to reach a constructive outcome regarding three main pillars of the NPT: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy. Bosnia and Herzegovina is entirely convinced that these three pillars are mutually reinforcing and that they must be equally considered. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the stronger engagement of civil society, including non-governmental organizations in nuclear non-proliferation issues, because positive movement in nuclear issues is important for all humanity in order to feel more secure. Nuclear weapons by their nature are incredibly dangerous and the way to get over could be found only through a comprehensive approach, which allows us to reach stability and security in the world. 
In conclusion, the Bosnia and Herzegovina has a long standing position: ready to contribute to the international efforts to reach, step by step, the world without nuclear weapons, promoting security and international cooperation. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman 
