I Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General debate
Statement by the
Head of the Delegation of
Brazil
H. E. Ambassador Marcel Biato
READING VERSION
Vienna, May 2017

Mr. Chairman,
The Brazilian delegation would like to congratulate you, Ambassador
Henk Cor van der Kwast, on your election as chairman of this
Preparatory Committee, and pledges to fully support your endeavors.
Brazil associates itself with the statements delivered by Ireland, on
behalf of the New Agenda Coalition, and by El Salvador, on behalf of
the CELAC.
Today, we embark on the fifth cycle of the NPT review since, in 1995,
we agreed on a grand bargain that opened the door for the NPT's
extension. That decision was meant to have renewed the commitment
of NPT States Parties towards the balanced implementation of all
three pillars of the Treaty.
On the nuclear disarmament front, progress has been, however,
especially dismal. Taking the lead from Latin America, through the
Tlatelolco Treaty, which set up the first nuclear weapon free zone, 50
years ago, the NPT should be actively encouraging an ever expanding
process of denuclearization. This also requires nuclear weapon States
removing reservations and unilateral interpretations which weaken the
effectiveness of nuclear weapon free zone treaties. 
Other commitments made in past review conferences are also long
overdue, including the convening of a Conference on a Middle East
free from nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Just as worrisome, nuclear weapons development has occurred in
breach of the NPT, while some States are actively promoting the
incorporation of nuclear possessing States into such entities as the
Nuclear Suppliers Group, without agreed criteria and on a case-bycase
basis. This sends mixed signals, to say the least, as it facilitates
access to nuclear supplies for countries not bound by the NPT or by
the nuclear weapon free zone treaties. This unsettling movement
translates into double standards and regime incoherence. It also
increases nuclear insecurity for non-nuclear weapon States,
amplifying the negative consequences of the unfulfilled grand bargain
of 1995.
Mr. Chairman,
Throughout the NPT`s history, geopolitical considerations centered on
nuclear deterrence have overshadowed core principles of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law declaring the
unacceptability and ultimate illegality of nuclear weapons.
The vast majority of the world's non-nuclear weapon States have
sought to reverse this trend by highlighting the grave humanitarian
consequences of a nuclear weapon detonation, by accident or design. 
The process of conferences on the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons confirmed that the mere existence of nuclear weapons is the
greatest hazard to world peace and security – and not its ultimate
enforcer as some would have us believe.
We are now at a new tipping point in the history of the nuclear arms
race. The NPT has proven to be successful in preventing non-nuclear
weapon States from developing nuclear arms. It has not, however,
been effective in curbing the modernization of existing nuclear
arsenals. The world order has not become safer, nor more predictable
thanks to nuclear weapons; quite the contrary. While suggesting the
possible use of nuclear weapons preemptively or in response to
political tensions in certain situations, nuclear-armed countries and
their military allies wish to dictate to non-nuclear weapon States the
pace of progress on nuclear disarmament.
Reliance on nuclear arms for national or regional security, and the
belief that they are a means to superpower status are the greatest
drivers of proliferation. While nuclear arsenals exist, and are vaunted
as the ultimate symbol of power, some State or non-State actors will
be tempted to obtain and use them in acts that will vaporize illusions
of peace and security built on nuclear deterrence.
Nuclear disarmament can no longer wait. A legally binding treaty on
the prohibition of nuclear weapons, leading to their total elimination,
will strengthen and complement existing obligations, in particular 
Article VI of the NPT. We invite all those genuinely concerned with
nuclear disarmament to participate in this process.
Mr. Chairman,
Twenty years have gone by and we are still waiting for the CTBT to
enter into force. Achieving a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing is
pivotal, even more so at this point time when the DPRK has been
recklessly defying our collective efforts.
Regrettably, the lack of ratification by the eight remaining Annex II
countries makes the CTBT an ever more elusive step in the so-called
step-by-step approach. Moreover, a ban on testing will only be truly
comprehensive and effective if it also encompasses sub-critical and
computer simulated experiments.
Mr. Chairman,
Over the last five years, there have been some achievements, of which
the JCPoA reached with Iran is the most noteworthy.
As we start a new review cycle, our challenge is avoiding any
backtracking on treaty obligations and existing commitments from
previous review conferences, especially those dealing with the area
where the main compliance deficit lies, that is, nuclear disarmament. 
As a contribution to this review process, a working paper has been
tabled by the New Agenda Coalition on strengthening accountability
and transparency. We look forward to discussing this substantive input
with other States Parties with a view to ensuring a results-oriented,
successful Review Conference in 2020.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.