Mr. Chairman,
Allow me to convey to you the Brazilian delegation's sincere congratulations on your election to preside over the First Session of the Preparatory Committee to the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. My delegation is prepared to extend to you our full support and cooperation.
Brazil fully associates itself with the statement to be delivered by Ireland on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition.
In 2005, I had the opportunity to chair the NPT Review Conference which regrettably did not conclude with a satisfactory outcome, despite our best efforts. The lack of a substantive result on that occasion has increased our responsibilities with regard to the new review process, as we cannot afford successive failures in our attempts to tackle the issues which have been jeopardizing the full implementation of the treaty. The NPT -which remains the cornerstone of the international disarmament and non-proliferation regime - faces a decisive moment, in view of the growing threats to international peace and security posed by the possession of nuclear arms and the risk of proliferation of these devices and other nuclear materials.
Brazil understands that the disarmament and non-proliferation processes are necessarily interrelated and mutually reinforcing. From our point of view, the implementation of a sustainable and long-term strategy in the field of non-proliferation depends on the simultaneous adoption of concrete measures as far as nuclear disarmament and fissile material are concerned.
The possession by some states of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons arsenals, has traditionally been a matter of grave concern for all mankind. It creates not only an assymetrical international environment., but also jeopardizes the credibility of non-proliferation efforts by the international community. Without effective, verifiable and irreversible progress in the field of disarmament, non-proliferation regimes can provide little - if any - sustainable results. A balanced implementation of the NPT, with substantive focus on the three pillars in which it is based -nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy -is vital for the achievement of its objectives.
Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right of the States Parties to develop and use nuclear energy and technologies for peaceful purposes should by no means be restricted, and the observance of Article IV of the NPT is absolutely vital. It is true that the development and use of nuclear technologies, which are essential for the progress of our societies, involve a risk of proliferation. Brazil is fully aware of the great importance of the non-proliferation pillar of the NPT and attaches great importance to the non-proliferation mechanisms contained in the other relevant regimes. The concerns in the field of non-proliferation have become even stronger in recent years, in view of the risk that weapons of mass destruction or radioactive material may fall into the hands of non-State actors.
One should keep in mind, however, that an essencial step to face nuclear proliferation is the fulfilment by the nuclear armed states of their unequivocal commitment towards nuclear disarmament, assumed at the 2000 NPT Review Conference. Brazil understands that, notwithstanding the changes which eventually took place in the international security scenario, agreements reached at earlier conferences are necessarily valid and shall by no means be overlooked.
Although there has been progress in the last few years in the dismantling of nuclear arsenals, the nuclear powers have not shown a solid commitment to disarm. To follow this path, these countries would have to review the role played by nuciear arms in their military doctrines. The leading role still played by these arms, which has even been revitalized by new rationalizations concerning the use of nuclear arsenals - including the
possible development of new and more accurate arms -, can become a paradigm for other States that could pursue the militarization of their nuclear programs in case they perceive themselves to be in the midst of a conflict scenario. We are also concerned with modernization processes of nuclear arsenals which seem to ensure that nuclear weapons will remain operative for at least a quarter of a century.
Progress on nuclear disarmament depends on a consistent and coordinated effort by the international community aimed at rebalancing the debate on the international security agenda about the issues of disarmament and non-proliferation. The shift towards almost exclusive priority given to non-proliferation, at the expense of the debate on disarmament, has occured following the insistence by key countries of the international community. This fact contributed in a decisive manner to the lack of substantive progress on the discussions in the last few years and also to create the atmosphere of discouragement that prevails in this debate. Rebalancing this agenda becomes of utmost importance as we begin the new NPT review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
The universalization of the NPT is a fundamental element in our quest to create a more stable and predictable international security environment. Complacency with proliferation outside the NPT is inconsistent with efforts to strengthen the Treaty's regime and may contribute to defeating the purpose of eliminating nuclear weapons. We should not solely address 'non-compliance' problems. The adherence to the NPT, as non-nuclear weapon States, by countries which have remained outside the Treaty is crucial. Any attempt to accommodate a 'de facto' nuclear status for those States will contradict the letter and spirit of the NPT.
The lack of tangible progress in the fields of disarmament and non-proliferation calls for urgent action on the revitalization and strengthening of the pertinent regimes. Not only must we seize this opportunity to kick off a process aimed at a full and balanced implementation of the NPT, but also to foster progress in other related issues. Brazil is convinced that the disarmament and non-proliferation regimes would greatly benefit from the immediate entry into force of the CTBT, the establishment and consolidation of nuclear weapon free zones - with due attention to the necessity of security assurances by the
nuclear armed states - and the end of the long-lasting deadlock which has hampered the work of the Conference on Disarmament. In this context, Brazil expects progress can be made in the discussions leading to the negotiations of a Treaty on Fissile Material, as well as on the three other issues on the CD agenda: nuclear disarmament, Security Assurances and Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space.
Mr. Chairman,
Confidence must be restored in the capacity of the NPT to reach its objectives. There is a widespread perception that the integrity of the Treaty is at stake and this is an issue which has to be addressed sooner rather than later. The strength, credibility and endurance of the NPT rests on a fundamental trade-off that must be recognized and upheld for the Treaty to be effective and lasting by virtue of its own merits. The Brazilian delegation is hopeful that under your guidance this Preparatory Committee can provide a sound substantive basis for the 2010 Review Conference and thus initiate a fruitful exercise towards the fulfillment of the Treaty's obligations in a balanced way.
Thank you very much.