1
PERMANENT MISSION OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
771 UNITED NATIONS PLAZA, NEW YORK, NY 10017
NATIONAL STATEMENT BY
MS. NORAZLIANAH IBRAHIM
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AT
THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)
30 APRIL 2015
Please	check	against	delivery	
2
Madame President,
At the outset, I would like to join others in extending our deepest condolences to the
Government and people of Nepal on the tragic event of the earthquake that has resulted
in the loss of lives of thousands of people and damage to properties. Our thoughts and
prayers also go to the victims and their bereaved families.
Madame President,
Let me begin by extending my warmest congratulations to you, on your election to
preside over the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I am sure that under your able stewardship and
with the support of the Bureau, we will have a successful Conference. Brunei
Darussalam aligns itself with the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Group of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) States Parties to the NPT and
Myanmar on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Madame President,
Brunei Darussalam reaffirms its support for the call for a nuclear weapon-free world,
which rests on the full implementation of the three basic pillars of the NPT, namely
nuclear disarmament; nuclear non-proliferation; and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. With today’s unpredictable security environment, there is a clear need to further
intensify and improve our efforts towards nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation.
Thus, collective efforts are needed for the full realisation of the NPT that
would further enhance our commitment towards a safe, non-nuclear weapon world.
Madame President,
Brunei Darussalam was encouraged by the successful outcome of the last NPT Review
Conference in 2010, whereby the 64-Point Action Plan was adopted. In this regard, we
call on all State Parties of the NPT to take essential steps and concrete action as well as
the necessary political will to ensure that a positive outcome can be reached at this
Review Conference. We believe it is important that we all strive to strengthen the Treaty
by adopting a substantive outcome that reflects our common determination for a world
free of nuclear weapons.
3
While it is very disappointing that progress towards nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation is moving at a snail’s pace, we have to acknowledge some of the
achievements made since the last Review Conference such as the political agreement
reached between the E3+3 and Iran; the holding of the Conferences on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in Oslo, Nayarit, and most recently in Vienna;
the High-Level Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament in 2013; as well as the commemoration
of the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons every 26
September. We believe these events have helped to create more awareness and further
our understanding and knowledge of the catastrophic effects of nuclear weapons, both
on human beings and the environment.
Madame President,
Brunei Darussalam has a well-established policy that prohibits developing, acquiring or
proliferating any kind of WMD or their delivery systems. With the total elimination of
nuclear weapons as the only guarantee against their use or threat of use, Brunei
Darussalam emphasises the importance for the early commencement of negotiations of
a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons to prohibit their possession,
development, production, acquisition, testing, stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use
and to provide for their destruction.
Brunei Darussalam also emphasises the importance of the full entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), which requires universal adherence.
With the growing concern on the continuous technology advancement and improvement
of nuclear weapons delivery systems, we call on the remaining Annex 2 States, whose
signature and ratification are crucial for the CTBT to enter into force, to materialise their
commitment.
Madame President,
Increasing regional security remains a top priority for us and being a State Party to the
Treaty of the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANFWZ), we believe this
to be an effective way to contribute more effectively and significantly to the maintenance
of peace, security and prosperity in the Southeast Asian region. In addition, Brunei
Darussalam supports the ongoing efforts that increases security in other regions and
reiterates its support for the establishment of a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in the
Middle East.
4
We are convinced that this would enhance regional and global peace and strengthen
efforts towards nuclear non-proliferation among all countries in the Middle East. Brunei
Darussalam therefore looks forward to the convening of the Conference on Establishing
a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the
Middle East as soon as possible. In relation to this, Brunei Darussalam would like to
express its appreciation to our ASEAN partner, Indonesia, for presiding over the recent
Third Conference of State Parties And Signatories of Treaties That Establish Nuclear
Weapon-Free-Zones (NWFZ) and Mongolia.
Madame President,
Brunei Darussalam would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate our support of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy under Article IV of the NPT, which states that State
Parties have the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with respective
safeguard agreements. In this regard, Brunei Darussalam strongly supports the
International Atomic Energy Agency as the sole authority for the verification of the
fulfilment of safeguards obligations by State Parties of the NPT. We also call on all
State Parties to the NPT, to uphold these principles of non-discrimination and
transparency under the necessary and proper safeguards.
In conclusion, Madame President, Brunei Darussalam reiterates its full commitment to
the efforts towards non-proliferation of all types of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). Brunei Darussalam will continue to support and engage in
international efforts for the collective vision of a world free from all nuclear weapons.
Thank you.
*********