Mr President,
We are gathered here to reconfirm our commitment to halting the spread of nuclear weapons.
This mission is above politics and diplomacy, above national ambitions and personal egos. It is our universal obligation and a joint commitment which we undertook 40 years ago.
Today we stand at a critical juncture in the future of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. We will either seize the opportunity to reverse the spread of nuclear weapons and build a momentum for their ultimate elimination; or prolong the period of indecision during which those who seek to challenge the Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) will grow stronger are more dangerous.
Today, I hope, there Is agreement that the NPT is under growing pressure. We cannot afford to see this Conference in a manner of "business as usual". Five years ago the Seventh Review Conference closed without any substantive agreement on the tough challenges facing the Treaty.
Bulgaria believes that every nation must put a strengthened NPT at the centre of its national diplomacy; that we all must confirm our commitment by taking steps to help achieve the regime's goals of disarmament, non- proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear technology.
We should do this with the clear mind that no country can achieve the goals of the NPT on its own. It takes all of us working together, all of us setting aside disagreements and procedural wrangling that have too often led to gridlock. Failure is not an option - we must make adherence to the Treaty an universal priority.
There are fundamental principles of nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation that are universal in scope and can be drawn from the preamble of the Treaty. We should invite all non-party states to apply comprehensive IAEA safeguards on all their civilian nuclear activities, cease manufacturing nuclear weapons and related materials.
Mr President,
A new sense of urgency has emerged since the last Review Conference. The uncovering of clandestine nuclear networks has brought the specter of non-state actors equipped with weapons of mass destruction closer. We must not allow this to continue.
All nations must recognize that the nuclear nonproliferation regime is undermined if violators are allowed to act with impunity.
For the first time a signatory has announced its withdrawal from the Treaty and has renewed its programme for producing highly enriched uranium. We consider all States Parties, including the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), to be bound by their NPT obligations. Leaving the NPT cannot be without consequences. Therefore we urge the DPRK to comply with all its international obligations under the relevant UN Security Council resolutions, IAEA standards, and return to the negotiations with a view to achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
There are justified concerns about the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which needs to, unconditionally, unequivocally and without delay fully comply with UN Security Council Resolutions, as well as IAEA standards and safeguards. Anything short of full compliance is unacceptable. The international community has made important steps reaching out to Iran and I join my European Union colleagues who have called on Iran to respond positively to these efforts. Bulgaria is convinced that a major step in this direction is the ratification and application of the Additional Protocol which has already been signed by Iran.
Today we also need to reaffirm our commitment to creating a Middle East Nuclear Weapons Free Zone, which should build on the success over the last few years in establishing the African and Central Asian Nuclear Weapons Free Zones.
Let me also turn to UN Security Council Resolution 1540. It is crucial to our efforts to prevent non-state actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. That is why today I hope you will join us in calling for the full implementation of this resolution.
We should also reaffirm that export controls are an essential instrument of non-proliferation. We must reject the false assumption that they impede co-operation and the transfer of technology. The Conference should also welcome the supporting role of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) in upholding the non-proliferation regime.
Nuclear security is absolutely necessary for a world free of nuclear weapons. Securing nuclear material is an immediate concern. Whether these are radioactive sources used in medicine, plutonium from weapons, or highly enriched uranium in research reactor fuel. That is why this Conference should call to secure the world's vulnerable fissile material. There are hundreds of tons of weapons-usable fissile material that could be potential targets for sabotage, misuse, or diversion and millions of radioactive sources scattered across the globe that are not tightly protected.
Mr President,
I will break no new ground if I underline that the effective implementation of the NPT can be successful only if all states recognise that strengthening the NPT is a joint endeavor. A joint endeavor that is backed by specific action.
In the run-up to today we saw a series of remarkable achievements:
the release of the US Nuclear Posture Review and a commitment to seek ways to reduce the role of nuclear weapons while maintaining a safe and secure deterrent capability;
the signing of the nuclear arms reduction treaty between USA and Russia;
the nuclear security conference that discussed measures to reduce the chances of any form of a nuclear attack; as well as
a renewed commitment by President Obama to seek ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and efforts to start negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT)
All these efforts should give us hope and inspiration that the Eighth NPT Review Conference can be a success.
For this success to be real, we must not shy away from our most important goals:
to strengthen the verification instruments of the IAEA,
enhance the enforcement measures of the non-proliferation regime, and
tighten the withdrawal provisions of the treaty so that that it cannot be abused by states that are found to be in noncompliance.
Bulgaria believes that the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreements and Additional Protocol are key to the current IAEA verification standard. In view of modern security challenges and the danger of nuclear proliferation to terrorist organizations, strengthening the NPT principles and safeguards constitute a precious tool to counter WMD terrorism.
Mr President,
I believe that all of us have gathered today at the UN in good faith and with a shared conviction to work towards Global Zero. Let us live up to the historic opportunity that we have, reverse the spread of nuclear weapons and build a momentum for their ultimate elimination. Thank you










Mr. Nickoiay E MLADENOV
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria
Prepared remarks for the 8th NPT Review Conference, May 3 2010
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4 of 6


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 5 of 6







Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



