Mr Chairman,
We, States Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, are meeting again a year after our last Prepcom, and to paraphrase an old song, what a difference a year can make, in the life of our Treaty and community. We convened last April with the shock waves of the DPRK's unprecedented notification of its withdrawal from the Treaty still reverberating throughout our security community. This was followed by the revelation of the prolonged failure of Iran to honour its commitments under its safeguards agreements. In our view, this pattern of behaviour constitutes non-compliance with fundamental obligations. While some important remedial action has been taken, many key issues remain unresolved and feed lingering suspicions as to Iran's real nuclear intentions. The last year also bore striking witness to that fact Libya had been deliberately violating its NPT obligations in pursuit of nuclear weapons. The fact that this State Party "turned itself in" and is actively cooperating in the elimination of its nascent WMD programs, while laudable, cannot blind us to the negative implications of its previous actions. Finally, and I do hope it is the final adverse revelation this Treaty community has to contend with this year, a black market in nuclear weapon-related technology run by Dr. Khan & Associates, and involving citizens or entities of several NPT parties has been uncovered. One would be justified in considering this past year, an annus horribilis for the Treaty.
These assaults on the Treaty's authority and integrity should not be left unanswered. They should be a spur to us all to take action to defend the Treaty against those who would undermine it. If this Treaty is the vital underpinning of the international security order that we consider it to be, it demands active measures to preserve and safeguard it. Part of the response should be a reinforced system to ensure that the Treaty's core non-proliferation obligations are being respected and are seen to be so. The Additional Protocol is now the verification standard, pursuant to Art III of the NPT, necessary to monitor compliance. We need collectively via a decision at next year's Review Conference to recognise this standard as mandatory under the Treaty and make it clear that cooperation under Art IV is possible only through the confidence the Protocol brings. The right to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is balanced by concomitant obligations; for the Treaty's security and economic benefits to continue, we all have to be prepared to make the additional commitment to ensure that non-proliferation obligations will never be derogated from.
We expect nothing less than full and unequivocal commitment to the letter and spirit of both the non-proliferation and disarmament obligations of the NPT. A world that contains 30,000 nuclear weapons, has 30,000 too many. We need to be bringing these levels down in a progressive and systematic manner. These reductions should be undertaken in a way that renders them irreversible, that is transparent as to the results and provides for verification of these results. It is only through measurable progress on that basis, towards fulfilment of the obligation to eliminate all nuclear weapons, that the nuclear-weapon States will be able to assure the rest of the Treaty's membership that they are respecting their end of tne bargain. The 13 steps toward nuclear disarmament, enumerated in the 2000 Review Conference document, constitute a significant action plan against which 1:o measure progress. A resumed work program at the Conference on Disarmament is
instrumental to realising many of these steps and we urge states to take the necessary decisions to permit this key multilateral forum to take up its work again.
In reviving multilateral disarmament activity, it is also essential to demonstrate to those outside the NPT regime, that security is not seen as dependent on acquiring nuclear arsenals. The greater the emphasis on the physical and doctrinal reduction of nuclear weapons in the security posture of the NWS paly to this Treaty, the less attraction such weapons will have to those on the outside looking in and the more open they will be over time to reversing the nuclearisation that has occurred and joining the multilateral consemsus. It is integral to this Treaity that we all seek to reduce the political or military value ascribed to nuclear weapons in order to facilitate their elimination. Our policies and practices should consistently reflect this stance. To send mixed messages in this regard is to compromise a central feature of this Treaty.
The NPT has proven to be a crucial component of a stable and secure international security environment. As we prepare for next year's Review Conference, which will mark the tenth anniversary of the historic decision to extend the Treaty indefinitely, we should provide the Treaty with all the means necessary to ensure its continued authority and vitality.
In this regard, Canada believes that it is time to bring the NPT in line with comparable international accords by providing it with a governance capacity to protect adequately the interests of its members in the face of real world threats. In order to overcome the current institutional deficit and vulnerability of the Treaty we would propose the following steps:
i)	reconfigure the existing preparatory process into a series of annual general conferences of States Parties to consider the state of implementation of the Treaty and take decisions as required. The existing preparations for the Review Conference, which would remain unchanged, would be subsumed into this annual process which would remain within the existing six week time envelope devoted to the preparatory process.
ii)	reconstitute the bureau of the review conference as a standing bureau of the Treaty to be elected at the Review Conference and to serve until the next quinquennial Review Conference. This bureau would be empowered to convene extraordinary sessions of the General Conference of States Parties when a situation threatening the integrity or viability of the Treaty arose.
iii)	continue secretarial support for this reconfigured process by the UN Department of Disarmament Affairs within the existing resources dedicated to the NPT.
We think these practical steps would go a long way towards giving the States Parties of this Treaty an enhanced forum for deliberation and a rapid reaction capacity to defend their interests when this Treaty regime is threatened. If such a mechanism had been in place when the DPRK gave its notification in January 2003
of its intention to withdraw, the collective will of this Treaty community could have been brought to bear on this wayward party. It is untenable in this day and age for the NPT member states to have to wait five years before exercising their decision making powers. This treaty is too vital to our security interests for its members to be complacent or ineffectual in its defence. We encourage member states to consider carefully these suggestions and work together towards adopting a suitable decision at the Review Conference to help correct this vulnerability in our processes and reinforce the authority and standing of the NPT. We also consider our earlier suggestions on regular report submission and increased access for civil society as complementary to this call for annual meetings as all serve to reinforce the "permanence with accountability" principle that underlay the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995.
I thank you and colleagues for their attention and look forward to working together during this Prepcom on behalf of this core Treaty in the multilateral effort against Weapons of Mass Destruction.
