CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
VÉRIFIER AU PRONONCÉ
STATEMENT BY
AMBASSADOR ELISSA GOLBERG
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN GENEVA
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO
THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
NEW YORK, 28 APRIL 2014
--------------------------------------------------------------------
DÉCLARATION DE
L’AMBASSADRICE ELISSA GOLBERG
REPRÉSENTANTE PERMANENTE DU CANADA
AUPRÈS DES NATIONS UNIES À GENÈVE
COMITÉ PRÉPARATOIRE DE LA CONFÉRENCE DES PARTIES CHARGÉE D’EXAMINER LE
TRAITÉ SUR LA NON-PROLIFÉRATION DES ARMES NUCLÉAIRES EN 2015
NEW YORK, LE 28 AVRIL 2014
Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations• Mission permanente du Canada auprès des Nations Unies • 885 Second Avenue,
14th Floor New York, N.Y. 10017 • Telephone (212) 848-1100 • Facsimile (212) 848-1195
http://www.un.int/canada
Mr. Chairman,
There can be no doubt that over the past 45 years, the NPT has made an important contribution to global peace
and security. The Treaty is not perfect and there is much that remains to be done to ensure its full
implementation, however, the world is far safer with the NPT than without. As such, Canada refuses to accept the
pessimistic voices which suggest that the 2015 Review Conference is destined to fail. Rather, we view this
Preparatory Committee as an opportunity to critically assess the status of the Treaty, including our national and
collective progress to implement the 2010 Action Plan. We must seek to use the next two weeks to identify those
actions – individual and collective – that we can take to bolster and build upon the success of 2010. Canada
remains optimistic that the goals of this PrepCom can be realized, but only through constructive dialogue and a
spirit of flexibility and compromise. The solution to the challenges faced by the NPT is not to seek to establish
processes outside the Treaty but rather to redouble efforts to meet the commitments we have taken within the
Treaty. If we can emerge from this PrepCom with an agreed agenda, and perhaps even concrete
recommendations for consideration in 2015, we will have helped to set the stage for a positive outcome in 2015.
We must not shy away from addressing all challenges faced by the Treaty. The extent to which all States Parties
strictly adhere to their non-proliferation obligations and the ability of this forum and the international community
as a whole to respond credibly to non-compliance with non-proliferation obligations will affect the future of the
treaty. It is of great concern to Canada that since we last met we have seen the continued absence of commitment
of several States Parties to the fundamental principles enshrined in the NPT. Nuclear proliferation activities by
Iran and North Korea, and continued non-compliance with their NPT obligations, undermine the Treaty and
remain the most pressing challenges to its integrity and authority.
North Korea’s ongoing nuclear and ballistic missile programs, as well as the restarting of operations at the
Yongbyon nuclear complex, are a clear and present threat to regional and international peace and security. These
actions also constitute flagrant violations of multiple UN Security Council resolutions and a fundamental
challenge to our efforts to advance nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In this context, we continue to call
on North Korea to fulfill its international non-proliferation obligations and resume adherence to the NPT. We
must ensure that no state can ever again benefit from peaceful nuclear cooperation, then illegally use technology
and material it received for weapons purposes and claim that the Treaty no longer applies to them.
Canada remains concerned about Iran’s nuclear program, which remains subject to nine UN Security Council and
12 International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors resolutions and associated sanctions. Despite
recent diplomatic progress, IAEA Director General Amano has stated that “much remains to be done to resolve all
outstanding issues.” Canada agrees completely, and believes that Iran must resolve all safeguards noncompliance
issues including those concerning nuclear weapons-related research – the “possible military
dimensions” of Iran’s nuclear program. It is important for the IAEA Board of Governors including Canada to
ensure that the large scope of Iranian activities presented to the international community in November 2011 are
fully investigated by the IAEA. This is in support of the broader diplomatic efforts of E3+3 (P5+1) to find a lasting,
comprehensive solution with Iran, which would be impossible without a full understanding of past and ongoing
Iranian activities. The IAEA has a key role to play in verifying Iran’s compliance with its obligations. It is in this
spirit that Canada underscores the importance of a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement together with an
Additional Protocol as the nuclear verification standard for all non-nuclear weapon states.
The newest regional situation that has ramifications on the NPT is the crisis in Ukraine. Canada condemns
Russia’s military intervention, which is a clear violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. These
actions violate Russia’s obligations under the UN Charter as well as its commitments under the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, which was a key part of the process to have Ukraine accede to the NPT and remove Soviet-era 
nuclear weapons from its territory. We reiterate our call for Russia to withdraw its troops and respect Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Chairman,
Another palpable challenge to the NPT that we must face is the continued production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices. Canada has long facilitated broadly supported efforts to
advance implementation of Action 15 on the negotiation of a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices. I am pleased to be chairing the UN Group of Governmental
Experts on this issue, which successfully concluded its first session earlier this month. With the Conference on
Disarmament unable to commence negotiation, the GGE provides a forum for a fact-based, policy neutral
discussion among experts, and whose recommendations can serve as a reference for future negotiations. We
invite all NPT States Parties to engage with the GGE, including through position papers on specific issues.
Canada and our partners in the expanded cross-regional Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI)
have continued to work steadily to advance the implementation of other key elements of the Action Plan. The
group submitted six working papers to this PrepCom that make concrete recommendations to advance Action
Plan implementation.
Beyond our own efforts, there is no doubt that the extent to which states – and particularly the Nuclear Weapon
States – are able to address their disarmament commitments will address another challenge to the Treaty. We
welcome the recent meeting of the Nuclear Weapon States in Beijing. Concerted engagement will be critical to
ensure that they are able to meet their obligations set out in Action 5, and effective communication of these efforts
can help to bolster confidence in their commitments under NPT Article VI. As announced at their April 14-15
meeting in Beijing, we look forward to the reports of the Nuclear Weapon States at this meeting and to more
consistent and comprehensive reports by the Nuclear Weapon States at future NPT meetings with a view to
further strengthening meaningful transparency on nuclear disarmament activities.
We also commend the tireless efforts of the Facilitator of the Middle East Conference on a Zone Free of Weapons
of Mass Destruction and of the three co-conveners to advance this critical initiative. To be successful, Canada
believes that such a Conference must be attended by all states in the region on the basis of arrangements freely
arrived at, and hope that the informal consultations can achieve this objective.
Mr. Chairman,
It bears recalling, in the face of the challenges to the NPT’s authority, the devastating humanitarian consequences
that could result from a nuclear weapon detonation. Preventing such an occurrence from happening again
underpins the NPT and our efforts to fully implement and strengthen it. While progress has been made on the
implementation of a number of items in the 2010 Action Plan, it is apparent that there remains much work to be
done. Our goal must be to implement all Actions to the greatest extent possible before the next Review
Conference. This will not be easy and, in some cases, may require overcoming incredible odds – for example
reaching an agreement on a Program of Work in the Conference on Disarmament.
There is every reason to believe that we can arrive at a strong and balanced outcome in 2015 if States Parties are
prepared to commit the political will and flexibility necessary to strengthen the NPT and advance its
implementation. Canada, for its part, stands ready to do so. The safety and security of Canada’s citizens, and
those of the global community, demands no less.
Thank you.