Thank you, Mr. President.
Mr. President, Canada more than ever demonstrated a strong commitment to strengthened national and international efforts to ensure that weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, do not spread to states or terrorists prepared to use them under any circumstances. Canada's Prime Minister Harper demonstrated leadership at the April 2010 Nuclear Security Summit in Washington by advancing non-proliferation as a theme for the upcoming G8 Summit. The 47 participating countries released a communique which highlighted the recognition of nuclear terrorism as a significant security threat while demonstrating the commitment of all participants to enhance nuclear security.
In March, in Gatineau, G8 Foreign Ministers issued a Statement on Non- Proliferation, Disarmament and Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy to highlight important elements to be addressed by the Review Conference.
IAEA safeguards are a fundamental element of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. While there has been progress made since the last Review Conference, it is still a concern that twenty-one States Party have yet to sign and bring into force a comprehensive safeguards agreement required under Article 111.1 of the Treaty. Furthermore, the nature and scope of the IAEA's annual conclusions is limited for those States that have only a comprehensive safeguards agreement in force, particularly with respect to conclusions about the absence of undeclared nuclear material or activities in a State. This deficiency was addressed when the Board of Governors of the IAEA approved the Additional Protocol to safeguards agreements. It would be an important step forward for the Conference to recognize that a comprehensive safeguards agreement together with an additional protocol represents the new verification standard.
Canada remains a strong supporter of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. By increasing stability and predictability, it enables further development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Article IV affirms the 'inalienable right' of all States Parties to research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This right is explicitly linked with the requirement for compliance with the obligations in Articles I and II and III.
Mr. President, this Review Conference is taking place after several serious challenges to its authority and integrity. The DPRK demonstrated its complete disregard for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament objectives by announcing its withdrawal from the NPT in 2003. We call upon the DPRK to return to the NPT, to dismantle its nuclear weapons programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner and to accept comprehensive IAEA safeguards on its nuclear programs.
This morning, Secretary General Ban made it clear that the onus is on Iran to dissipate doubts and concerns about its nuclear ambitions. It is unfortunate that
President Ahmadinejad decided to ignore that invitation and instead delivered a predictable and aggressive statement.
In addition, Iran's extensive past undeclared nuclear activities, together with its efforts to acquire the full nuclear fuel cycle without any justifiable reason, have resulted in deep concerns that it is seeking to develop a nuclear weapons capability contrary to its Treaty commitments. Immediate and complete cessation of Iran's uranium enrichment and other delicate proliferation-sensitive activities, in accordance with UN Security Council and International Atomic Energy Agency obligations is the only objective indicator of the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme.
Canada recognizes that regional security is a crucial consideration for those States that remain outside the Treaty. Canada supports efforts to bring peace to the Middle East. We also support efforts by States to make progress towards a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. Canada calls upon the three States which have yet to adhere to the Treaty to accede to it as non- nuclear-weapon States.
At the forefront of our efforts to support the Treaty this year is our proposal, contained in Working Paper 4 on institutional reform. This paper, which has been co-sponsored by a cross-regional group of 17 States, proposes specific decisions to further strengthen the review process of the Treaty and to make it more responsive to States Party. We welcome further co-sponsorships of this initiative and hope that the decisions contained therein will be reflected in the outcome of this Conference.
Mr. President, numerous challenges face us as we begin our work. But this is not a recipe for pessimism or for lack of ambition. On the contrary, it is a call for each of us to make a dedicated and determined effort, and to display the political will and flexibility necessary to arrive at a strong and balanced outcome that will reinforce this core Treaty. This conference is taking place not just at a time of challenge but also a time of renewed optimism and great opportunity. Let us seize that opportunity.
Thank you.











Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



