Statement by Ambassador Elissa Golberg
Permanent Representative of Canada to the Office of the
United Nations and to the Conference on Disarmament, Geneva
First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, Austria, May 2, 2012
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election as Chair and
assure you of my delegation's full support.
Canada welcomes your proposal that we use this PrepCom to take stock of our efforts to
implement the 2010 Action Plan thus far. In this vein, I would like to emphasize Canada's key
priorities and outline some of the work it has undertaken since 201 0 to implement our
commitments. I would also call the attention of all delegations to the two national reports
submitted to this PrepCom by Canada, first, on its implementation of the NPT, the 13 practical
steps from 2000 and the 2010 Action Plan and, second, on its implementation of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East.
Canada is a member of the Non-proliferation and Disarmament Initiative, a group formed
with the express goal of advancing the implementation of our NPT obligations. Through the
NPDI as well as with our partners in the G8, Canada has sought to advance the universalization
of the Additional Protocol. We believe that a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the
IAEA and an Additional Protocol that is fully in force represent the current safeguards standard
to which all NPT States Parties should adhere. Furthermore, they should become the
international community's condition for new supply of nuclear materials. Through our Global
Partnership Program, Canada made a voluntary contribution of C$1 million over the 201012011
fiscal year toward the purchase of equipment and security improvements at the IAEA's
Safeguards Analytical Laboratories in Seibersdorf, Austria, with the goal of strengthening the
effectiveness and efficiency of the IAEA's safeguards.
Dealing with existing and new cases of non-compliance with nuclear non-proliferation
commitments is vital for the integrity and authority of the NPT. Canada is deeply concerned
about the risk of destabilization brought on by the continued non-compliance by Iran to its NPT
and IAEA safeguards obligations. Iran's continued illegal enrichment of nuclear material, failure
to cooperate fully with the IAEA, and activities that can only be understood in the context of a
nuclear weapons development effort contradict its claims that its nuclear program is for peaceful 
Page 2
purposes. We urge Iran to comply with its international obligations under the NPT, its IAEA
safeguards agreement and UN Security Council resolutions.
Iran's defiance of the international community is unfortunately matched by that of North
Korea, most recently demonstrated by its failed ballistic missile test in contravention of UN
Security Council Resolutions 171 8 and 1874. North Korea has repeatedly demonstrated its
complete disregard for nuclear non-proliferation measures by announcing its withdrawal from
the NPT in 2002 and conducting nuclear tests in October 2006 and May 2009. Such provocative
actions continue to threaten international security and stability.
Canada also calls on Syria to return to full compliance with its NPT obligations.
Canada has taken action to advance priorities under the 2010 Action Plan, particularly
on FMCT negotiations and achieving entry into force of the CTBT which both have strong nonproliferation
dimensions as well.
At the sixty-sixth session of the UN General Assembly, Canada sponsored a resolution
entitled "Treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices" that, inter alia, called for the CD to agree on and implement early in
its 2012 session a Program of Work that included FMCT negotiations. We regret that consensus
proved unachievable on the proposal made by the Egyptian CD President that would have
allowed for progress on all four CD core issues, including on an FMCT. We continue to believe,
strongly, that a verifiable multilateral agreement to halt the production of weapons-usable fissile
material will benefit the security interests of all countries. With the continued failure of the CD to
agree on a Program of Work, we are assessing our next steps, in light of the commitment of the
UN General Assembly to consider at its 2012 session, if necessary, options to advance
negotiations. For too long, the CD has stood moribund, failing to provide direction and
leadership due mainly to the abuse of its consensus rule. This rule was intended to ensure
national interests are respected in negotiations, not to prevent negotiations from being initiated.
Canada welcomed the ratification of the CTBT by Annex 2 state Indonesia in February
201 2, which brought it one step closer to achieving entry into force. We also welcome the
ratifications by non-Annex 2 states since the last Review Conference, including the Central
African Republic, Ghana, Guatemala and Trinidad and Tobago. The signature of the Treaty by
Niue on April 9, 2012, is also a positive development as it reduces to 13 to number of states that
have yet to sign the Treaty.
Canada is also continuing to work with our NPDI partners to engage constructively with
the P5 on their commitment to be more transparent on their nuclear arsenals. We continue to
believe that increased transparency of nuclear-weapons-related information is an important
element for making progress in nuclear disarmament, building security and confidence and
fulfilling NPT commitments. We welcome the P5's unprecedented collaboration to follow up on
the 2010 RevCon outcome through their 201 1 Paris and other meetings.
Canada is actively contributing to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Canada fully
supports the legitimate right of all States Parties to full access to nuclear material, equipment
and technological information for peaceful purposes. However, the right to the peaceful uses of 
Page 3
nuclear energy comes with obligations. All NPT States Parties must fulfill their nuclear safety,
security and non-proliferation obligations.
In our view, nuclear security and safety should be promoted along with non-proliferation
within the NPT as a way to strengthen the basis for nuclear cooperation on the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. A key requirement of Canada's nuclear cooperation policy is the establishment
of robust bilateral agreements designed to ensure that Canadian materials and technology are
supplied for and remain in peaceful applications. Canada has undertaken a number of
measures nationally to strengthen the security of our nuclear material, including strengthening
our nuclear regulations, physical protection of nuclear facilities, and nuclear detection
capabilities at our borders.
Canada continues to promote international efforts to ensure that nuclear weapons or
weapons-usable materials do not spread to states of proliferation concern or non-state actors
including terrorist organizations. Since the last NPT meeting in May 2010, Canada spent over
C$110 million to secure nuclear and other high activity radiological materials through its
activities under the 24-member Global Partnership Program against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction. And we will continue this work. In March 2012, Prime
Minister Harper announced the renewal of Canada's Global Partnership Program for an
additional five years (2013-2018) with C$367 million in new financial resources. The Prime
Minister also announced a $5 million voluntary contribution to the IAEA's Nuclear Security Fund.
In cooperation with the US Department of Energy, Canada is also working to enhance security
of vulnerable high activity radioactive sources, many of which are Canadian-origin. Canada is
an active participant in the Proliferation Security lnitiative (PSI), the Global lnitiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and the G8 working groups on
non-proliferation, nuclear safety and security and the Global Partnership. To contribute to
GICNT activities and exercises, Canada will host in Toronto in May 2012 a table-top exercise to
demonstrate its emergency management capabilities in the event of a radiological terrorist
attack.
As you are aware, during the review cycles in 2005 and 201 0, Canada has called for
steps to strengthen the NPT's review process to make it more responsive to the needs of States
Parties. However, despite cross-regional support, our proposals have not been adopted as
actionable items. Canada continues to believe that more can be done to strengthen the principle
of "permanence with accountability" that underpinned the indefinite extension of the NPT in
1995. We intend to consult widely with delegations during this PrepCom and those that follow
to seek views about how best to strengthen governance and accountability in the NPT.
To ensure a successful outcome in 2015, we must not rest on our laurels from the
successful outcome of 2010. Rather, we must undertake a dedicated and determined effort, and
display the political will and flexibility necessary to arrive at a strong and balanced outcome that
will strengthen this Treaty and advance its implementation. There continues to be an opportunity
to fulfill the optimism of recent years and maintain the momentum toward the goals the NPT was
designed to achieve. Let us seize that opportunity.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
