Thank you Mr. Chair,

The Canadian Delegation warmly congratulates you on your election and we look forward to working with you.

The outcome of the 2005 Review Conference was disappointing. It was followed by a slow start at the 2007 Preparatory Committee. It is now our task to work towards a successful outcome of the 2010 Review Conference. It is critical for Member States to underline the NPT’s continuing relevance, to uphold the 1995 bargain of “permanence with accountability”, and to respond effectively to the serious challenges that have arisen.

The NPT is a cornerstone of the international security architecture. It has established three inseparable and mutually reinforcing core components: the prohibition against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the obligation to pursue negotiations in good faith on nuclear disarmament, and the framework for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Canada seeks a substantive and balanced outcome from the 2010 Review Conference, one that advances the NPT’s objectives in each of the three main components.

Nuclear proliferation remains a significant concern. The DPRK’s nuclear test in October 2006 was a brazen act of defiance against the will of the international community. This was the first nuclear test since 1998 and the first ever by a state that had joined the NPT as a Non-Nuclear-Weapon State. Since then the Security Council has acted and we welcome the progress that has been made within the framework of the Six Party Talks. However, more remains to be done. Canada calls on the DPRK to comply with UNSC resolutions, to meet its Six Party Talks commitments, including to abandon its nuclear weapons programme and to recommit itself to the NPT.  In addition, my delegation is concerned by recent information that may point to illicit nuclear cooperation between the DPRK and Syria, and calls on both countries to cooperate fully with the IAEA to clarify the situation.

Another challenge to the non-proliferation norm of the NPT is presented by Iran. Although Canada recognizes that Iran has a right to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, that right also comes with obligations. Iran has lost the confidence of the IAEA Board of Governors and the Security Council through its two-decade history of concealing nuclear activities. We call on Iran to begin the process of establishing international confidence in its nuclear activities by complying fully with Security Council resolutions. We encourage Iran to pursue the proposed package of incentives offered by China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States to suspend further discussion of Iran’s nuclear programme by the Security Council in exchange for Iran’s suspension of sensitive nuclear activities and implementation of the Additional Protocol.

Canada calls on all Non-Nuclear-Weapon States which have not done so already to bring into force a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) with the IAEA. In addition, we urge all States with a CSA to bring into force an Additional Protocol to that agreement. Together, these two instruments should constitute the verification standard pursuant to Article III of the Treaty. Acceptance of both agreements should eventually become a condition of supply of nuclear equipment, material and technology to all Non-Nuclear-Weapon States. We also encourage the full implementation by all States of Security Council Resolution 1540 which requires States to adopt and enforce national legal frameworks and systems of export control to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

 

 

On nuclear disarmament, we welcome the reductions made by some of the Nuclear-Weapon States and we encourage them to continue their efforts. However, the currently estimated holdings of 25,500 intact nuclear warheads are still too high and the pathway for further reductions not adequately clear or fully irreversible. We encourage the Nuclear-Weapon-States Parties to reaffirm the NPT’s obligation to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures towards nuclear disarmament. We would like to see the implementation of commitments already accepted, such as the Principles and Objectives at the 1995 Review Conference and the 13 Practical Steps of the 2000 Review Conference. 

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is still not in force more than a decade after its signature. We continue to urge all states that have not yet done so to ratify the CTBT and work to complete its verification network – the International Monitoring System – which has proven its capability to detect nuclear test explosions anywhere in the world.

While the Conference on Disarmament has made some modest progress, the long awaited resumption of Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT) negotiations has still not occurred. In addition, Canada supports discussions to codify negative security assurances on a legally-binding basis and on the establishment of effective nuclear-weapon-free zones. More progress on these and other disarmament steps set out in 2000 will be most welcome.

Canada firmly believes that peaceful nuclear applications can help in increasing prosperity, contributing to sustainable development, limiting greenhouse gas emissions, and reducing the disparities between developed and developing countries. However, the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy is not absolute: it is conditional on the fulfilment of the non-proliferation obligations of the NPT. Canada supports new international fuel cycle initiatives which address both peaceful uses and non-proliferation concerns; do not unduly interfere with the free market; and are based on criteria which recognize and reward exemplary non-proliferation credentials of a state.

The NPT is a near-universal legal instrument, which embodies universal norms. Canada calls upon the States which have yet to adhere to the Treaty to accede to it as Non-Nuclear-Weapon States. Canada recognizes that a permanent solution to long-standing regional issues is a key element in achieving this goal.

Mr. Chair, another key Canadian objective is to enhance the NPT’s overall credibility and effectiveness. In 2005, Canada submitted a working paper advocating certain institutional improvements. We support annual meetings of the State Parties, and emergency sessions if necessary, to allow for timely discussion of critical issues such as withdrawal or a suspected nuclear weapon test. We advocate for a small standing bureau to provide stewardship and continuity. In addition, we support reporting on the implementation of the Treaty and the continued participation by civil society to enhance transparency, accountability and implementation. We welcome comments by other delegations and look forward to building a consensus around institutional reforms at this and the next Preparatory Committee, so that decisions can be taken at the 2010 Review Conference.

In conclusion, Mr. Chair, let me refer to the debate on what should come first – non-proliferation, disarmament, or cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Canada believes that progress must be made simultaneously in all these core elements of the NPT. Despite its failings, the benefits of the NPT to date have been considerable. Just imagine a world without it. It is our duty to make a dedicated and determined effort, and to display the political will and flexibility necessary, to arrive at a strong and balanced outcome at the 2010 Review Conference that will reinforce this important Treaty.

Thank you Mr. Chair.