Mr. President, (Salutation and Congratulations)
The political compromise inherent in and regulated by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons continues to play a key role in the maintenance of international peace and security. And, as in all political compromises, the compensations granted and legally solemnized through the signature and ratification of the relevant instrument are equally important and must be given equal treatment.
There can therefore be no doubt that nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are mutually reinforcing objectives that must be pursued with equal vigour, There can be no doubt about the legal significance of the obligation assumed by nuclear-weapon States in Article VI of the Treaty. There can be no doubt that the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty" - which we must negotiate as soon as possible on the basis of the "Shannon Mandate" - are key milestones on the road to nuclear disarmament.
From a legal perspective, the issue is not whether or not nuclear weapons should be eliminated but rather how and when.
The difficulty for States Parties to the Treaty lies in how to take this legal obligation - situated as it were in the conceptual realm of what ought to be - into the world of political realities for its full realization. And this is a difficulty that - whether we like it or not - all States Parties face in common, since the implementation of Article VI requires conditions of global security and stability to which all members of the international community, including the smallest, must contribute. This is the essence of the principle of collective security. And because collective security is enhanced by regional security, India, Israel and Pakistan must also subscribe without conditions to the Treaty, as non-nuclear States.
Mr. President,
The world of political realities is the world of the possible. My country operates in that world inspired by the principles that derive from its humanist, democratic and republican vocation: the paradigm of human security has found enthusiastic and committed support in Chile and is at the core of our foreign policy in the field of international security and disarmament. Nevertheless, Mr. President, history has taught my country that pragmatism is a shorter route to the realization of ideals and principles than their mere rhetorical proclamation. It is therefore with our ideals in our heart and pragmatism in our head that Chile has come to this Review Conference to contribute its political will to the achievement of a satisfactory outcome.
Thus, to reassure States Parties that we remain committed to the outcome - the full outcome - of the Sixth Review Conference, we declare that we have come to the Seventh Conference five years later with our eyes wide open and with a clear awareness of the threats that were violently unleashed on the international scene in 2001. The teleological or ultimate objectives of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will not make us lose sight of the tasks before us here and now. These derive from our objective experience which teaches us not only that there are proliferators in the making (successful in the case of North Korea) but also that the use of nuclear artefacts by terrorists is now viable.
Chile believes in the contribution of regional and subregional mechanisms to global security. We therefore welcome the willingness shown by the friendly States of East Asia to continue to deal with the North Korean question (including Pyongyang's nuclear military programme) under the "six-party" format. We wish them every success but note that, should they not succeed, the Security Council will be obliged to exercise its authority to thwart any threat to international peace and security.
Mr. President,
Chile claims the inalienable right provided for under Article IV of the Treaty to benefit from all peaceful uses of atomic energy, including the generation of electricity from nuclear power. The growth of our economy and the corresponding increase in demand for energy obliges us to keep all options open for future generations of Chileans.
We also believe that this is the right of all non-nuclear weapon States Parties, provided that they abide strictly by the provisions of Article III. Today, the credibility of the safeguards system depends on the early universalization of the Additional Protocol. We therefore urge all States Parties to subscribe to the Protocol without delay.
Chile is also of the view that the risks inherent in the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction cannot be dissociated from the risks inherent in the proliferation of their delivery systems. That is why Chile -in the spirit of Security Council Resolution 1540, which we wholeheartedly support- participates actively in the activities of the Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and works to join other non-conventional regimes against proliferation - such as the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and the Australia and Wassenaar Groups - which make an immensely important contribution to the global effort to contain proliferation.
Mr. President,
We welcome with pride and satisfaction the First International Conference of States Parties and Signatories to the Treaties establishing Nuclear-Weapon Free Zones, held in Mexico City late last April. The Conference reaffirmed the importance of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones as mechanisms that effectively contribute to progress towards nuclear disarmament and at the same time constitute powerful regional confidence-building mechanisms that strengthen peace and security where they exist. The Antarctic Treaty and the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba (and the unilateral declaration of Mongolia) must therefore be followed by other instruments - freely negotiated - to establish nuclear- weapon free zones in the Middle East and Central Asia.
Chile also supports the negotiation of a universal and legally binding instrument that provides security guarantees of non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or States that have renounced the possession of such weapons.
Mr. President,
In concluding this initial intervention, we wish to reaffirm our confidence in the diplomatic skills of participants to reach consensus on a final document that will reflect areas of agreement and make appropriate reference to the various currents of thought existing among us. Chile reiterates its political will to support this effort.
Thank you very much.
