Mr. President,
Allow me to congratulate you on your designation to preside over this Conference, as well as to affirm the complete collaboration of my delegation in the carrying out of your important and demanding task.
Mr. President:
Since the invention of the atom bomb, the nuclear threat has been dormant, putting human existence at risk. The international community has witnessed the devastating effects of nuclear weapons. Nevertheless, those deadly weapons of mass destruction have not been banned. The only way to free ourselves from that threat is to achieve the complete elimination of nuclear arsenals. That is where the importance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty lies, as the only multilateral instrument that creates the obligation for States that possess nuclear Weapons to adopt measures to put a stop to the race to acquire and develop this type of armaments and reach full nuclear disarmament. For this reason we insist in the urgency of international legally binding instrument that prohibits the development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons.
In this regard, my country reiterates the imperative necessity of achieving the universalization of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, cornerstone of the disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, as well as its effective application, in particular of its three pillars: disarmament, non- proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We encourage States that possess Nuclear Weapons to honor their unequivocal commitment to eliminate their nuclear arsenals, with the goal ofachieving general and complete nuclear disarmament. Likewise, we urge them to comprehensively apply the 13 Practical Steps adopted in the 2000 NPT Review Conference.
While the goal of nuclear disarmament is reached, it is essential that States that possess Nuclear Weapons guarantee that they will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States that do not possess them. Our best hope would be to have a legally binding instrument that provides us thee negative security guarantees. We underscore the need to negotiate this agreement as soon as possible.
Aware that the nuclear threat resides not only in existing nuclear arsenals, but also in the possible development of new weapons, we insist on the importance of negotiating a multilateral, non-discriminatory and verifiable treaty that bans the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons or other explosive nuclear devices.
Hoping to prevent the production of new nuclear weapons and the improvement of the currently existing ones, as well as liberating the planet from the consequences of radiation, we insist also in the necessity of achieving a comprehensive ban of all nuclear tests. We must achieve the universalization of Nuclear Test ban Treaty. In this regard, we make a special plea to Annex 2 States to sign and ratify this instrument. While this Treaty comes into force, a moratorium on nuclear tests should be applied.
Mr. President,
My country recognizes the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency, as a verifier and guarantor that nuclear programs are only and exclusively peaceful in nature. Nevertheless, the Agency cannot carry out this role if it does not have the necessary legal tools. Therefore, we urge States that have not yet done so, to sign and ratify the Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols
Colombia is a country deeply committed with disarmament and non- nuclear proliferation. Constitutionally, on the national territory the production, import and use of weapons of mass destruction is prohibited. As a result, and reflective of this commitment, Colombia is a State Party of the main international instruments on the matter, among which I highlight the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Likewise, we are Party to treaties that prohibit nuclear tests, among them Antarctic Treaty, the
Treaty that prohibits nuclear tests in the atmosphere, outer space and underwater, and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
On the other hand, Colombia participates in other political initiatives that have as their purpose to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Among these initiatives, I would like to refer in particular to the Hague Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and to our recent adhesion to Proliferation Security Initiative.
Mr. President,
43 years ago, when the Treaty of Tlatelolco was open for signatures, my country joined in on the unavoidable commitment to forever maintain its territory free of nuclear weapons, preserving the use of nuclear energy only and exclusively for peaceful purposes. Today, I reiterate our commitment to the precepts of the Treaty, and to the brave work of OPANAL, aimed to the fulfillment of those commitments.
My country has fully honoured the obligations undertaken in light of this Treaty. Therefore, an Agreement for the Implementation of IAEA Safeguards is current in force, and an Additional Protocol to that Agreement entered into force for my country on March 5, 2009. In this way, Colombia supports the work of the Agency and works in coordination with its Secretariat to apply safeguards in the country and improve the radiological protection infrastructure.
Latin America and the Caribbean, as the result of the willingness of our States, became the first densely inhabited area of the planet free of nuclear weapons. Nevertheless, it is essential that States that possess Nuclear Weapons respect unconditionally their denuclearization status and not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against State Parties to Tlatelolco. I take this opportunity to urge them to withdraw the interpretative declarations made when signing or ratifying Protocols I and II of Tlatelolco
The spirit and goal of the Treaty of Tlatelolco maintains its full validity. Indisputable evidence of this is the celebration of the Second Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia held last April 30th in this city. Nuclear weapon Free Zones are perhaps the greatest contribution to the disarmament and non-proliferation regime, and a positive contribution to international peace and security.
I would like to bring up the message contained in the UNESCO Charter "since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defenses
of peace must be constructed". Colombia reiterates the importance of education in disarmament and non-proliferation, as a means for transforming the paradigms and generating a culture of peace. We must promote education on and for disarmament. We recognize the efforts of the United Nations on this matter. Therefore, we invite the Organization to include in its program of disarmament scholarships, a segment dedicated to Nuclear Weapon Free Zones as an effective mechanism for complete and general disarmament.
Mr. President,
Nuclear weapons should not have a predominant role in international politics. The political realities have changed and that must be reflected in the security and defense doctrines, in agreement with the obligations undertaken in light of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
My delegation would like to reiterate the inalienable right of all States to develop nuclear energy with peaceful intentions in agreement with articles I and II of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We insist on the importance of international cooperation to promote the exchange of equipment and materials, as well as the training of human capital in the nuclear sciences, a required step in making this right a reality.
In this regard, the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the main promoter of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, can contribute to the socio-economic development of States.
Mr. President,
Colombia would like to emphasize the new dimension acquired by the proliferation of nuclear weapons taking into account the growing interest in the acquisition and possible use of this type of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists and armed illegal non-State actors. This latent threat has been recognized in various international instruments and decisions, among them the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and resolution 1540 of the Security Council. Colombia feels thee duty to warn the international community about this risk, taking into account its ample experience in the fight against the terrorist aggression of which it has been a victim for decades. The strict fulfillment of the rules set out in the NPT, and the rigorous application and observance of the norms and mechanisms of thee IAEA, as well as the cooperation among States in their fight against this scourge is essential.
Mr. President,
The international community hopes for a peaceful and safe world, free from the nuclear threat. This Conference, and its results, must fully reflect that expectation. We hope that the political will and the spirit of compromise prevail and that we can advance in a decisive manner towards the goals set out in the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Thank you very much.














Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



