Let me begin by congratulating you on your election as Chairman of the VIII Review Conference of the Non Proliferation Treaty, the cornerstone of all efforts to free the world of the threat of nuclear weapons. Costa Rica will do everything in its power to contribute to
This meeting is aimed at strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. After 2005, we cannot afford another failure. Our common objective is to strengthen our collective security by means of invigorating the rule of law at the international level, increasing cooperation
gradually diminishing nuclear arsenals until achieving their total extinction. Every step that we adopt here must reinforce the common aim of liberating future generations of nuclear
Costa Rica reaffirms its conviction that non-proliferation, disarmament and cooperation for the peaceful use of nuclear energy are pillars that require a balanced and nondiscriminatory implementation. Neglecting any of them threatens the whole regime and paves the way for proliferation, as has unfortunately happened so far. This Conference has to be aware that since the NPT entered into force forty years ago, the world has not been able to reduce the nuclear threat. The peoples of the world should not have to keep on waiting for our governments to demonstrate the collective political will required to achieve
This unprecedented global juncture, characterized by shared points of view on collective security, should lead to the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, whose fragmentation makes overall progress conditional upon the progress of each of its components. It is therefore urgent to ensure the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, improve IAEA safeguards and protocols, create a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East, promote new disarmament initiatives for nuclear States and initiate negotiations of a multilateral, non-discriminatory and effectively verifiable treaty
We all know that one of the biggest obstacles for the consolidation of the nuclear non- proliferation regime has been the lack of progress in nuclear disarmament. While advances in the reduction of nuclear weapons have been almost irrelevant, trillions of dollars have been spent on vertical proliferation. What was originally conceived as a symbiotic process aimed at simultaneously invigorating disarmament and non-proliferation has in effect
None of this ceases to be surprising. When the NPT was opened for signature in 1968, all humanity shared the view that nuclear weapons are contrary to morality and international law, as was confirmed nearly three decades later through an Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice. It is therefore surprising the frivolity with which a handful of governments and military establishments justify their possession of weapons that are, in of
Costa Rica hopes and is ready to support any decision aimed at promoting the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. We thus believe it is essential to strengthen the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verification of disarmament activities, to promote the generalization of negative security assurances by all nuclear states, to put a stop to the militarization of outer space, to include sub-strategic weapons in the negotiations on disarmament, to promote unconditional adherence to the protocols of the treaties of nuclear weapons free zones, and to de-alert nuclear weapons in order to have the necessary time to ensure the interests of all mankind.
International verification is imperative in order to build the confidence we all need. Objective verification must be based on the principles of science and must guarantee national interests and be in compliance with international law. Costa Rica is convinced that there are no privileges that exempt anyone from verification with regard to nuclear issues. The growing reluctance of some States to accept unrestricted verification must move the international community to adopt procedures that build trust between nations while giving precedence to the interests of all.
There are recent signs of renewed political will. The renewed interest of the Security Council to nuclear disarmament, the adoption of Resolution 1887 last September, the increased cooperation to prevent nuclear weapons from falling in the hands of non-State actors, the agreement to reduce arsenals by the two largest nuclear powers and the recent nuclear security summit are all milestones of what should become a vigorous process.
However, a history of hesitations and setbacks has diminished even the optimism of those who are most willing to move forward.
The legacy of the regime we are trying to fix today is a world in which there are more nuclear weapons, a world where there are more nuclear states, a world swarmed with weapons with greater destructive capacity than those that existed in 1968. In sum, a world capable of destroying itself many more times over and much more quickly than when the current non-proliferation regime was put in place. It is necessary for the world to recover the sanity that it had back in 1968, a sanity that gave away first to the madness of mutually assured destruction and then to the demented doctrine of nuclear deterrence.
For these reasons it is important to explore new paths that can lead us towards a world free of nuclear weapons, a goal that has been hindered by the fragmentation and inconsistency of the instruments we have available today.
Thirteen years ago Costa Rica and Malaysia presented a draft Framework Convention on Nuclear Weapons. This draft, which the Secretary-General considered a "good point of departure", was updated and presented again to the First Preparatory Committee of this Conference in Vienna in 2007. Building on this draft we could create an instrument capable of strengthening confidence in verification and ensure the supervision of processes, dismantling and definitive reduction of the nuclear threat.
Developing countries, small countries, non-nuclear states and those of us who are part of nuclear weapons free zones have an important role to play in this Conference and a responsibility before the world. Last year Costa Rica co-chaired with Austria the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization, we chaired The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missiles, and, as an elected member of the Security Council, we chaired the 1540 Committee, we contributed to the adoption of Resolution 1887 and we organized an open debate on the strengthening of collective security through the general regulation and reduction of armaments. Through these actions, Costa Rica believes that we are doing our part and assuming our responsibility. Today we call upon all those whom are guided by narrow national interests to join the overwhelming majority that wants to adopt new agreements on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation that would make possible a world free of nuclear weapons.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



