Mr. President,
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you on your election as President of the Review Conference. I am confident that your expertise and your hard working staff will lead our common efforts to a successful conclusion. I assure you of the full cooperation of the Croatian delegation.
Croatia aligned itself with the statement delivered on Monday by the Luxembourg Presidency of the European Union. However, the importance of this event prompts us to reiterate our national positions on the basic elements of the Treaty and provide information on measures undertaken for its implementation.
Mr. President,
The Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has confirmed its role as the most important international deterrence instrument against the threat of nuclear arms proliferation, while at the same time promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It is our firm belief that since its entry into force, the Treaty has helped to facilitate and promote the enhancement of both regional and global strategic security and stability. Echoing the Secretary- General's warning of the globally devastating impact of a possible nuclear catastrophe, we understand that people around the world expect concrete results from their representatives during the next four weeks. This is further evident by the strong involvement of civil society on the margins of the Conference, which we support.
Let me stress that Croatia supports each of the three, equally important, pillars on which the NPT is based. Nuclear disarmament, with the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, should be the end product of this Treaty. Nuclear non-proliferation is a principle that we actively pursue. Legally binding security assurances by the five nuclear weapon states to non-nuclear weapon states would only strengthen this principle and avoid unnecessary insecurity. Peaceful uses of nuclear energy are something on which Croatia relies and intends to do' so in the future. We invite all nuclear capable states to enter into peaceful nuclear cooperation with states in need of advice and help in that regard. For many developing countries and countries with economies in transition, the role of the Technical Cooperation Programme of the IAEA is extremely important in the transfer of nuclear knowledge. Croatia strongly supports the Technical Cooperation Programme and the help it provides.
Despite important positive achievements in the past five years, especially the adherence of Timor Leste and Cuba to the Treaty, Croatia continues to be concerned with the fact that there are still a number of states that are not Parties to the NPT, bringing into question even the desirability, if not the necessity, of the universal adherence. Croatia therefore must repeat its call on those states which have not yet done so to accede to the NPT as soon as possible as non-nuclear weapons states.
Croatia regrets the notification by the DPRK of its withdrawal from the NPT. Croatia supports the views expressed by a number of delegations which have insisted on the need
to develop an adequate mechanism to handle all such and similar situations. In this respect, the proposal to hold annual conferences during which States Parties could take important decisions on all matters relating to the Treaty merits serious further consideration.
We recognize and support the work of the Security Council Committee established by Resolution 1540 with the goal of curbing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to non-state actors. We believe that the implementation of this resolution will seriously hamper attempts to proliferate nuclear weapons technology and know-how.
Croatia believes that regular reporting by all States on the implementation of Article 6 and paragraph 4(c) of the 1995 Decision on Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non- Proliferation and Disarmament could be a first step in the right direction, and is one of the preconditions for more successful functioning of the Treaty. I am pleased to announce that Croatia will again present its national report on measures undertaken to implement the Treaty at this Review Conference.
Mr. President,
Croatia considers the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement combined with the Additional Protocol to be an adequate verification standard under the NPT and urges all States Parties to conclude such a protocol as soon as possible. We agree with the proposal that the Additional Protocol should be required as a condition of nuclear supply to non- nuclear weapon states, as well as with a principle of non-cooperation with states that are not in compliance with their IAEA Safeguards Agreements.
Croatia considers the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) exceptionally important and urges all States Parties to the NPT that have not yet done so to accede to the CTBT. Pending entry into force of the CTBT, we call upon all states capable of nuclear weapon tests explosions to adhere to the moratorium on nuclear explosions of any kind. Furthermore, we call upon all States Parties to the NPT to immediately begin negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear devices within the Conference on Disarmament or in any other appropriate forum.
Finally, Mr. President, let me briefly inform you of the Croatian strategic priorities, based on obligations assumed in the field of international security and on their implementation mechanisms. Croatia endeavors to strengthen its legislative and operative procedures with regard to nonproliferation, export control, nuclear safety and import and export of weapons and other military equipment. Croatia has adopted legislation on the import and export of arms, military equipment and dual use materials. This is particularly important in this day and age when curbing illegal trafficking of nuclear weapons and materials is taking a leading role in the non-proliferation policies of many countries, including mine.
Particular importance has been given to legislation in the nuclear field. Croatian laws and regulations on nuclear safety and security are in accordance with EU legislation. Croatia has a Law on Nuclear Safety and Law on Control of Dual-Use Goods Export and is implementing the Nuclear Suppliers Group's Guidance and its list of products. Furthermore, the National Institute for Nuclear Safety became operational in January 2005.
Croatia is a Party to all major international nuclear non-proliferation agreements in this field - the NPT, the CTBT, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, the Hague Code of Conduct, and it adheres to the EU Code of Conduct for Arms Exports. Croatia has signed the Additional Protocol with the IAEA for the Application of Safeguards in connection with the NPT. In doing so, Croatia accepted the obligation to establish supervision of and control measures in the production, import and export of specific equipment and materials specially designed or prepared for production, processing or use of nuclear materials.
Croatia is ready and willing to enter into the relevant international arms control regimes. Besides its candidature for the accession to the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), Croatia has applied for membership in the Wassenaar Arrangement (WA) and the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). Croatia has also given public support to the activities of the Proliferation Security Initiative and principles for the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and expects to join the Initiative in the near future.
Mr. President,
The sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations is a year of reform. Member States are urged to make bold decisions before and during the September High-level plenary meeting. We believe that all Parties to the NPT, in particular major actors, should do their utmost to create a constructive atmosphere at this Conference and seek to reverse the trend which led, in the words of the Secretary-General, to the crisis of confidence and compliance with the Treaty. This would be beneficial to the future of the non- proliferation regime, and an encouraging sign to the overall reform efforts.
Thank you, Mr. President.
