Mr. President,
The Czech Republic fully endorses the statement of the European Union. In addition, allow me to touch upon some issues that are of particular importance to my country.
First of all, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your appointment as President of this Review Conference. The Czech Republic has full confidence in your ability and has no doubt that you will lead us towards tangible results of this meeting.
Mr. President,
We came to New York to advance NPT's objectives. As for my delegation, we hope that the Review Conference will give us a set of action oriented recommendations that will result in strengthening of the NPT system in all of its aspects. We hope to produce an action plan that would renew our commitments to prevent proliferation, to proceed with nuclear disarmament and to use the benefits of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
hi the past year, we have witnessed a renewed momentum of the nuclear agenda. The Security Council adopted the milestone resolution 1887 committing towards world without nuclear weapons and endorsing a framework of actions to prevent proliferation. My country's capital, Prague, had the honor to host a signing ceremony of the New START Treaty that brings about important cuts in the strategic nuclear arsenals. The Washington Nuclear Security Summit made a further progress in reducing global nuclear dangers by bringing the agenda to the highest political level and by securing important commitments in nuclear security.
We hope that this renewed momentum will continue. We wish to appeal to all states possessing nuclear weapons to work towards the goal of achieving global nuclear disarmament and to all States to work on an international environment that would be favorable to this process. Creating such environment includes strict compliance with the existing rules, as well as working on a more concise framework that would include a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing and production of fissile materials for military purposes while enabling efficient verification of these obligations.
Further strengthening of the NPT architecture is particularly relevant with regard to the withdrawal provisions of the Treaty. For the Czech Republic, it is unacceptable that a county would use the withdrawal provision as a way to evade sanctions and penalties for Treaty violations, and the States Parties should agree on how to collectively respond to any possible notification of a withdrawal. States Parties intending to leave the Treaty should remain responsible for any violation of the Treaty committed prior to withdrawal, and should not be free of their obligations under the NPT.
Mr. President,
Let me state my country's continuous support to the International Atomic Energy Agency. We wish to applaud its expertise and impartiality. We wish to preserve the Agency as a strong technical body, and shield it from political pressure. We especially appreciate its efforts when dealing with proliferation crisis, such as those of Islamic Republic of Iran and DPRK. I wish to underline that any non-compliance with the assumed obligations diminishes confidence in the Treaty.
Taking into consideration the new challenges the Agency is facing, it is our shared responsibility to equip the Agency with sufficient resources for fulfillment of its duties stemming from the NPT, as well as all the other tasks assigned to it.
In order to optimize the IAEA's verification activities, recognition of new verification standards are needed. The Czech Republic has been a continuous supporter of establishing the Additional Protocol as the core standard of the verification process and the verification activities of the Agency as the key measure to ensure the peaceful nature of the nuclear programme. The acceptance of the Safeguards Agreement together with the Additional Protocol has a deterrent effect on the nuclear proliferation and creates an efficient tool for the Agency to be able to provide credible assurance of the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities.
To conclude, Mr. President, let me assure you that my delegation will spare no efforts to achieve successful outcome of this conference and that you can rely on our full support in your endeavors during the upcoming weeks.
Thank you.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



