THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS 
Denmark's Statement at the General Debate 
New York 28th April 2015 

Thank you, Madame President, and congratulations on the efficient work performed by you and the secretariat, you can count on our full support throughout the coming weeks. 
Aligning ourselves with the intervention made by the European Union, allow me to draw your attention to some points of specific interest to Denmark. 
Most of us gathered here today have probably met skepticism from various sides about the possible positive outcomes of this Review Conference. We do not share that skepticism. It is easy to point out many factors that may have a negative impact on our negotiations. But it is equally easy to point to THE main factor that can over-ride this: political will. If we have the political will to reach an ambitious outcome of the 2015 NPT RevCon in all three pillars, we can get there. 
And there are very many factors that should bring out this political will: the world cannot continue to stagger on without resolutely downsizing nuclear arsenals, with-out firmly ensuring non-proliferation, and without ensuring the safety and security of all nuclear materials. Our goal is a world free of nuclear weapons. To realize that vi-sion, we must act. And we have to recognize that not acting is not equal to standing still; not acting is equal to retracting even further from the ultimate goal of the NPT. 
In three months' time, 70 years will have passed from the use of the atomic bomb over Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The solemn remembrance of the victims must induce in us the necessary political will. And we urge the remaining UN members to join the NPT as non-nuclear weapons states. 
From the very outset of the "nuclear age", scientists, politicians, and security experts got stuck in heated debates on how to ensure that this new invention would not turn out to have catastrophic humanitarian consequences, erasing all life from this planet, but would instead be harnessed for the prosperity and health of mankind. Many ide-as have been put forward, rejected, modified, reshaped, renamed and rejected again. Finally, with the entering into force of the NPT 45 years ago, the world got a firm foundation from which to develop the road to realizing this, including the vision of a world without nuclear weapons. Now the calendar shows 2015 and we must set tangible, achievable goals along that road. Goals that must encompass the full imple-mentation of all NPT commitments. 
On the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index 2014, Denmark is ranked number 1. We are, understandably, proud of being perceived as the least cor-rupt country in the world. Why are we able to achieve this? Among various factors, time and again it turns out that an inseparable part of our success is the fact that Denmark is a trust-based society. And this is why I am drawing your attention to it: we need trust to continue down the road to Global Zero. Trust among all UN member states, trust among all NPT members, and trust among and between nuclear weapons states and non-nuclear weapons states. 
How do we reach the needed level of trust to move all three NPT pillars decisively forward? As Greek historian Herodotus stated more than two thousand years ago "Men trust their ears less than their eyes". This is equally true in the nuclear age —and equally true for women one could add, although women in our view are not yet adequately involved in many aspects relating to the NPT. 
Trust is not something you claim, it is something you gain. Something you earn, not from your words, but from your actions. Building-block by building-block. Trust is a fragile thing: today's difficult security environment, in the Ukraine, in the Middle East, seems to inspire some to return to old, bad habits of threating rhetoric that only nourishes distrust. This enhances the security of no-one; it is a zero-win game. What we need is openness, transparency, and verification. 
Madame President, Denmark is a member of the energetic Vienna Group of Ten and we have submitted a paper to this review Conference with a range of proposals that we hope and trust you will find useful. The recommendations of the Vienna Group of Ten cover a broad spectrum of issues: underlining the utmost urgency of the entering into force of the CTBT, calling for the universal application of current-standard IAEA safeguards, stressing the need for effective export controls, and underlining the cen-tral role of nuclear safety and security. 
The European Union has also worked hard to prepare for the RevCon. Last week our Foreign Ministers adopted Council Conclusions and we have submitted working pa-pers on a range of issues. 
Together, the five Nordic countries have presented to this Review Conference a paper on nuclear disarmament. We have worked together, gained trust, and showed politi-cal will to reach a common understanding. 
We hope these recommendations will inspire you and contribute to bringing forth the required political will to achieve a forward-looking outcome document of the 2015 NPT Review Conference. 
Thank you, Madame President 
Statement by Susanne Rumohr Hkkerup, Ambassador for Disarmament, Non-proliferation, and Arms Control #DKAmbDisarm 
