EGYPT 

j■■••41Amil 
The Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations New York 
'fte cssl 
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations in New York at the General Debate of the third session Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference New York April 28, 2014 (Please check against delivery) 
Mr. Chairman, 1. I would like to congratulate you for your election to chair the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference. Let me assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation. At the outset, Egypt associates itself with the statements of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, Nigeria on behalf of the African Group, Iraq on behalf of the Arab Group and Ireland on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition. 
Mr. Chairman, 2. We gather here today at this third -and presumably last- Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference, yet few would challenge the fact that we are less than prepared at this stage to hammer out a collectively agreed outcome either here at this PrepCom or at the Review Conference itself next year. We realize, like many others present here today, that progress on the ground in implementing the Treaty, the resolution and decisions adopted at its indefinite extension, or even the forward looking Action Plan adopted in 2010 remains radically limited compared to the expectations of the international community, the spirit and letter of the Treaty itself, as well as the foundations for its indefinite extension two decades ago. This growing disconnect between what should be done under the NPT and what is being actually done, often in contradiction to the Treaty, brings to the forefront the question if we are still on the right track towards realizing Treaty universality, advancing and achieving nuclear disarmament, or even towards our ability to successfully review the implementation, or more accurately the lack of implementation. 
Mr. Chairman, 3. While this session prepares for the upcoming Review Conference, it confronts derailment in the implementation of commitments contained in the 2010 action plan. This is particularly true with regard to nuclear disarmament and with regard to the Middle East. The failure to convene, in 2012, a Conference on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons, and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East frames the context in which this Third Session of the PrepCom is held. 
We are now one year away from the 2015 Review Conference and not even the date of the Conference has been announced. The decision on specifying a date remains hostage to linkages and preconditions by some, basically claiming that the Conference date cannot be specified before all its preparatory documentation has been agreed. This linkage keeps the timeframe for agreeing on such documentation open and prescribes for the preparatory consultations to extend to a point where only failure to convene the Conference can be reported in 2015. We in Egypt do not want to see this scenario occur. We are willing to work with the Facilitator and all concerned to avoid such failure. The Conference is not an end in itself but rather a beginning. Failing to arrive at that starting point can only question political will, without which no progress on the Conference or on any other issue can be realized. 

5. On nuclear disarmament, it is clear that much more needs to be done to implement the NPT's unfulfilled ambitions in this area. Conferences held recently in Oslo and Nayarit have culminated in an ever growing demand for the realization of a world free from nuclear weapons, in view of the intolerable and indiscriminate effects the use of these weapons would cause. In Nayarit, it became clear that the international community will continue to push stronger than ever toward a Nuclear Weapons Conventions, one we believe represents the core of the implementation of Article VI. 
6. While nuclear disarmament remains an unequivocal undertaking and legal commitment for nuclear-weapon-States, practices by the same States question seriously their intention to take the lead towards the earliest realization of a nuclear weapon free world. These practices include policies of extended deterrence, nuclear umbrellas for Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States, cooperation with non-members of the NPT and more importantly, their continuing possession of nuclear weapons. 
7. The 2015 NPT Review Conference should review the status of implementation of each of the 13 Practical Steps adopted by consensus in 2000. The PrepCom also meets within the setting of an important initiative that should guide our deliberations, namely the adoption by the General Assembly of Resolution 68/32 on the follow-up to the first-ever High-level Meeting of the Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament that called for urgent commencement of negotiations on a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons. 
8. This Third PrepCom is about to be tested on the fulfillment of yet another deadline set out in the action plan of the 2010 Review Conference, regarding the reports required from the nuclear-weapon States on their implementation of Action 5 relating to nuclear disarmament. While we are all eager to consider the required reports later in this session, it is already evident that the call of Action 5 of the 2010 Review Conference of achieving genuine 'concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament' has not met the expectations of the international community, nor has it responded to the urgent need to progress towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons, with a view to sparing the world from threats posed by these weapons to the very survival of humanity. 
Mr. Chairman, 9. In the midst of setbacks in fulfilling commitments and implementing obligations emanating from the NPT and its Review Conferences, we are further alarmed by attempts to curtail the inalienable right enshrined in the NPT for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Several international fora and initiatives promote policies and disseminate a discourse, that diverge from the letter and spirit of Article IV of the NPT. The NPT could not be clearer in this regard when its Article IV states that 'nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination'. 
Mr. Chairman, 10. Against this background, this PrepCom should pave the way for a substantive outcome of the Review Conference. If the credibility of the NPT is to be preserved, and its centrality for the non proliferation and disarmament regime to be safeguarded, this review cycle has to ensure the fulfillment of commitments and obligations with regard to the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, as well as on the total elimination of nuclear weapons. The outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference is only the beginning in this regard. The 2015 outcome document needs to take it as a point of departure, by reviewing progress in implementation and prescribing a forward looking action plan, with time bound goals. 
11 We are confident in your ability, Mr. Chairman, to steer the discussion towards a successful outcome. Egypt stands ready to assist you and cooperate with you and all other States represented in the PrepCom to realize this goal. Success will require all parties to the NPT to uphold their commitments, and display the necessary political will to ensure a balanced outcome of this review cycle, in order to strengthen the Treaty and preserve its role in the future 
Thank you for your attention. 
