Statement by
H.E. Ambassador Hesham Badr
Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs for International
Organizations and Multilateral Affairs of
The Arab Republic of Egypt
Before
The Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee to the 2015
NPT Review Conference
General Debate
Geneva, April ~3"~ 2013 Check against delivery 
Mr. Chairman,
Let me at the outset congratulate you on assuming the chairmanship
of the second session of the preparatory committee of the 2015
Review conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We fully trust in your ability to preside over this
meeting and we look forward to your conclusions that would reflect
the proceedings of this important meeting.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt aligns itself with the statements delivered by Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the statement by
Tunisia on behalf of the Arab Group and the statement by Brazil on
behalf of the New Agenda coalition.
Mr. Chairman,
As we start the second session of the Preparatory Committee of the
2015 NPT Review Conference, the question most relevant to our
discussions is what is the real utility of these meetings? Do we come
to the NPT Review Conferences and its preparatory committees to
discuss issues related to the treaty and reach consensus on
decisions, resolutions, undertakings and practical steps to implement
them or do we take them with the intention of ignoring them at the
end of these meetings with impunity after having been agreed by
consensus? I am afraid that the record shows that on balance the
latter prevails.
Given the situation, it indeed important to go back to basics; that is
the original package of the NPT and its regime, or if you will the"
Grand Bargain of 1968. The NPT was original set up as nuclearweapon
States committing themselves to nuclear disarmament, in
return for which non-nuclear-weapon States undertaking + not to
develop nuclear weapons, while in endorsing this agreement, all
States Parties affirmed the inalienable right to pursue the peaceful
application of nuclear energy. So let us assess where we are from
this grand bargain.
Mr. Chairman,
The peaceful applications of nuclear energy have been expanding
since 1968. More states have been making use of nuclear energy 
whether in power generation, in medical applications or for other
uses. More countries are posed to establish or expand peaceful
nuclear applications in the coming years and decades. This was
done, among other things, with the help of the International Atomic
Energy Agency that continues to be the Agency responsible for
multilateral cooperation in this field. However, resources directed
towards technical cooperation remain limited,, thus not allowing all
countries - especially developing countries - to fulfill their potential for
the development of peaceful applications of nuclear energy. This is
not for the lack of resources, as the Agency have seen expansion in
the resources directed to other functions, functions that are important
but by no means more important than technical cooperation.
Moreover, the governing of the Agency remains uneven. Many
regions remain under-represented in the board of governance of the
Agency, despite the decision that was taken in 1999 to expand the
board of Governance to better represent the world community.
Mr Chairman,
Horizontal nuclear non-proliferation is indeed the most achieved part
of the Grand Bargain. Not only has the membership of the treaty
expanded to include almost all the countries in the world as nonnuclear
weapon States, but those non-nuclear weapon States have
for the most part are fulfillings their obligations under a clear
verification regime enshrined in the comprehensive safeguard
agreements. Some countries have even voluntarily taken extra
obligations with the additional protocols. This is not to deny that there
were some challenges to the horizontal non-proliferation
commitments. But it remains a fact that the great majority of the
members of the NPT have kept their horizontal non-proliferation
commitments. There is of course notable exceptions, and these
exceptions need to be addressed in order to reach a universally
adhered to NPT, and with countries currently outside this regime
joining the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon States and placing their
nuclear facilities under IAEA verification.
Vertical proliferation, however, remains a serious challenge. Not all of
the five nuclear weapon States have committed to decreasing their 
arsenals. On the contrary, all of the nuclear weapon states continue
to modernize their weapons-related facilities, arsenals and/or the
means of delivery. Moreover, nuclear sharing remains in place, with
the deployment of nuclear weapons on the territories of non-nuclear
weapon States. This is indeed a violation of letter of articles 1 and 2
of the NPT, let alone the spirit of the treaty. To truly label nonproliferation
a success, the issue of vertical proliferation and nuclear
sharing must be fully addressed and actionable steps should be
implemented.
Mr. Chairman,
While peaceful application of nuclear power and nuclear nonproliferation
can be described as mostly positive, the nuclear
disarmament - a key foundation of the Treaty - remains an ultimate
disappointment. Despite years of declaring nuclear disarmament as
the top priority of the disarmament agenda, little can be shown in
terms of concrete steps to achieve this objective. Article VI of the
Treaty clearly says that each party of the Treaty undertakes to pursue
negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation
of the arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament. Forty
five years after the conclusion of this treaty such a multilateral
negotiation did not start. In the meantime, we have agreed in the NPT
review conference on the decision on the principles and objectives for
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of 1995, the thirteen
practical steps for the systemic and progressive efforts to implement
Article VI of the Treaty of 2000, the twenty two actions on nuclear
disarmament 2010, and yet not much had materialized in advancing
the cause of nuclear disarmament.
Instead, we are told that many efforts have been done to reduce
nuclear arsenals through unilateral or bilateral initiatives and that the
five nuclear weapon States have started a dialogue. Those are
welcomed developments. But they are by no means a multilateral,
legally binding and verifiable regime to achieve a nuclear
disarmament. And let me remind the nuclear weapon States that the
consequences of nuclear weapons, including the humanitarian
consequences, do not stop at borders but they are a matter of threat
to everyone and consequently it is the concern of the whole humanity
to usher nuclear disarmament. Nuclear weapon States indeed say 
that they do recognize the humanitarian consequences of nuclear
weapons, but the question that awaits a satisfactory reply is what has
been done to remove those weapons.
On the contrary, not only do nuclear weapons continue to exist in the
arsenals of nuclear weapon States, but they also continue to be an
integral part of the military doctrines, postures and/or policies of those
countries and the military alliances they belong to, that is
consecrating their existance. We are told that such weapons are
need for the security of their citizenry and that the current conditions
are not ripe to get rid of nuclear weapons. Such arguments not only
run contrary to the letter and the spirit of the Treaty but they are
unhelpful if our objective is to rid humanity of nuclear weapons and
the threat it posses to humanity. Indeed, history have shown us that
as long as nuclear weapons exist for some countries, others will stop
at nothing to acquire them and that the only true guarantee that
nuclear weapons is never used is their total elimination. And let me
be clear, there is no such thing as nuclear weapon in good hands
versus nuclear weapons in bad hands. It is a bad weapon in any
hand. It has to be eliminated from all hands.
Mr. Chairman,
The above assessment shows that the achievements of the three
pillars of the NPT have been uneven. A building that arises with
uneven pillars is at best deformed, at worst unsustainable. This is
why we need to restore the balance among addressing the issues
related to the pillars of the treaty. We need to restore the balance
between the responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear weapon
States on the one hand and those for the non-nuclear weapon States
on the other. We also need to restore the balance between the level
of obligations of the non-nuclear weapon States and those for the
nuclear weapon States, with the earlier being legally binding and the
later to be implemented if convenient. This imbalance is not
sustainable.
Mr. Chairman,
The biggest dismay yet relates to the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. Indeed, the history of this issue, considered by many as 
the fourth pillar of the NPT, has been one of unfulfilled commitment
after the other. Egypt and many Arab countries have joined the NPT
with the understanding that this would lead to a Middle East
completely free of nuclear weapons. However, more than thirty years
later, one country in the Middle East - namely Israel - remains outside
the NPT.
The issue of the Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction was forever enshrined into the
NPT with the 1995 NPT Extension and Review Conference. The
indefinite extension of the Treaty without a vote was made possible
with the adoption of the Resolution on the Middle East. Since then the
Arab countries continued to engage positively in the NPT regime '
while advocating the implementation of the resolution, and Egypt was
part of the New Agenda Coalition that was instrumental in ushering
the success of the 2000 Review Conference. However, little was
done to implement the Resolution on the Middle East for fifteen
years. Going into the 2010 NPT Review Conference, it is common
knowledge that the success of that Review Conference - after the
failure of the 2005 NPT Review Conference - depended on agreeing
on a steps to begin implementing the 1995 Resolution on the Middle
East.
The 201 0 Review Conference endorsed practical steps towards the
full implementation of the 1995 Middle East resolution. This included
holding a Conference in 2012 on the establishment of a Middle East
free of nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction and the
appointment of a facilitator to support the implementation of the
Resolution including undertaking preparations for convening the
Conference.
However, instead of immediately working on implementing such
steps, more than a year passed before a facilitator was nominated
and a host government was selected. Then, and despite the positive
engagement of the Arab group with the facilitator and the
announcement of all the countries of the region, with the exception of
only Israel, that they will participate in the 2012 Conference, the coconveners
unilaterally and without consultation with the countries in
the region announcement the postponement of the Conference. This 
postponement constitutes a breach of the commitments agreed to in
the 2010 Action Plan. No new date for the Conference has been
announced till now despite the arduous calls to implement what was
clearly agreed to.
The continued lack of any movement towards the establishment of a
Middle East free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction raises serious questions regarding the steps that are
agreed to and commitments made; whether those agreements and
commitments are made in good faith to be implemented or only to
ensure the "success" of a meeting with no intention to keep them.
Furthermore, the Arab Spring launched an era of sweeping changes
in the countries of the Middle East and North Africa, with the people
rising demands for a stronger voice in their own governance. Arab
governments are becoming more accountable to their people and
foreign policy is becoming in line with domestic aspirations and a
reflection of popular demands. The Arab street is already aware of
the nuclear file in the Middle East and the current situation is
unsustainable and this has to be addressed immediately. We
reiterate the responsibility of the co-conveners, the United Nations
Secretary General together with three cosponsors of the 1995 Middle
East Resolution, to fulfill their mandate in convening the postponed
conference without any further delay. This is not the demand of the
Egypt or the Arab group alone but rather the collective will of the
parties to the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
We attend this meeting to seek a way that would guarantee the full
implementation of commitments of the three pillars of the Treaty and
the establishment of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
