Mission of Estonia
to the United Nations
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
29 Apri12014
Statement by H. E. Mr. Margus Kolga,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Estonia to the United Nations
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on your
election as the chair of the third Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference.
You can count on the full support of the Estonian delegation. Aligning ourselves with the
statement on behalf of the European Union, we would like to make some remarks on issues that
Estonia attaches particular importance to.
Mr. Chairman. The three pillars of the NPT, namely disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful
use of nuclear technology, stand for peace, security and trust. Aggressive actions taken by the
Russian armed forces against Ukraine have jeopardized all of those three virtues in the EuroAtlantic
region. Exercising use of force against the territorial integrity and political independence
of Ukraine, the Russian Federation has clearly violated, among other international agreements and
norms, the Budapest memorandum. We surely think that the strategic decision by the Ukrainian
Government 20 years ago, to join the NPT as a non-nuclear state in favour of security assurances,
was the right one. However we sincerely hope that violating the Budapest memorandum does not
turn out as an alarming lesson for those who are yet to become members of the NPT. We call upon
Russia to honour international legal norms, its international commitments and take immediate and
concrete steps in implementing the Geneva accords from 17 April2014.
We have followed very carefully the evolution of the paradigm of catastrophic humanitarian
consequences from the use of nuclear weapons and we have participated in conferences that took
place in Norway and Mexico treating this very issue. Estonia subscribes to the views of the
working paper "Building Blocks for a World without Nuclear Weapons" submitted by a group of
20 states, including Estonia, to the NPT Preparatory Committee. We do share the concern of
diverse nuclear risks and their serious impact on humanity, but achieving a goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons requires a building block approach while implementing the 20 I 0 NPT Action
Plan. Furthermore we believe that the strategic context of nuclear disarmament should also be
taken account. We remain sceptical about initiating parallel processes that do not involve states
possessing nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless we fully understand the frustration of the international community about the lack of
progress in taking forward the multilateral disarmament agenda. The Conference on 
Disarmament (CD) has become a synonym for the words like 'impasse' or 'deadlock' and we
keep repeating that another year is going by with the CD unable to start negotiations or even agree
on a program for its work. At the same time, there are number of countries who want to join the
CD and to contribute to achieving disarmament goals making it a more universally represented
body. The Rules of Procedures of the CD stipulates that "the membership of the Conference will
be reviewed at regular intervals". We call the members of the CD to appoint a Special Coordinator
on enlargement.
The successful conclusion of the Anns Trade Treaty (A TT) demonstrates that success in the field
of multilateral arms control is possible. The universalisation of the treaties remains another
priority. We urge all states, particularly those whose adherence is required for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) to enter into force, to sign and ratify the treaty without further
delay.
International treaties and agreements serve us well only when they are fully and effectively
implemented and transfers of sensitive, WMD enabling goods and technologies are controlled.
This is why we, once again, highlight the importance of export controls. We would like to
recognize the importance of the work that the Nuclear Suppliers Group has done in the area of
effective export controls in nuclear trade and encourage all states to make use of multilaterally
agreed guidelines and principles in developing their own national export controls.
As for the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, we highly value the technical cooperation
programme of the IAEA. Over the years Estonia has contributed to the Technical Cooperation
Fund as well as benefitted from different TC projects. The cooperation is of great importance in
the improvement of regulatory infrastructure, medical applications and radioactive waste
management in Estonia. Through fruitful technical cooperation with the Agency we have gained
valuable knowledge that we are willing and ready to share with other IAEA member states.
Mr. Chairman, as this is the last session of the Preparatory Committee before the next NPT review
cycle starts, we hope that constructive spirit will help you guide this very important meeting to a
successful conclusion and we are able to find compromises on all practical arrangements for the
20 15 NPT Review Conference.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 