Statement
By
Yoseph Kassaye
Deputy Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations Office at Geneva and Other
International Organizations in Switzerland
At
The Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
Meeting for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT)
24April 2018
Geneva
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you on your election as chair
of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference and assure you of my delegation's cooperation in the
discharge of your responsibility.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statements delivered by the African
Group and the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
Mr. Chairman,
The world today is still confronted with a danger of continued
existence of nuclear weapons and of their possible use or threat of use
which pose existential threat to humanity. The risk that these weapons
could end up in the wrong hands is also another grave concern which no
doubt alarms us all. These threats, coupled with the fact that existing
multilateral negotiations are far from bringing countries to a consensus
have made our task of pursuing a world of free of nuclear weapons all the
more difficult. Failure of the 9'h NPT Review Conference to reach
consensus on a final outcome document and the long years of delay to
agree on a work plan that leads to substantive discussion on the
Conference on Disarmament are testimonies to the need for strong
political will and commitment toward the elimination of Nuclear
Weapons.
This is a time that we should be firm in our resolute to get rid of
these weapons once and for all to ensure sustainable global peace and
securi:ยง. We believe that this preparatory meeting is therefore another
opportunity which the international community must seize to move the
process forward.
As a party to the Treaty, Mr. Chairman, Ethiopia has always been
committed to the effective realization of the NPT by actively participating
on the sole multilateral negotiation forum on Nuclear Disarmament and
unconditionally supporting the core principles of the NPT, including
adopting related resolutions by the United Nations General Assembly on
Nuclear Disarmament.
Ethiopia has also translated its commitment to action by engaging
in the uiception, development and realization of the Pelindaba Treaty
which established the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone under the
auspicious of the African Union. Ethiopia voted in favor, along with 122
countries, for the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons last year. We will continue our engagement and support efforts
that lead to a nuclear free world.
We also understand that the immense and uncontrollable destructive
capability and indiscriminate nature of nuclear weapons cause
unacceptable humanitarian consequences. We, therefore, reiterate our
call, as we have always done, for nuclear weapons never to be used again
to avoid devastating calamities. The only way to guarantee that nuclear
weapons will never be used again is their total elimination.
Mr. Chairman,
Ethiopia believes that all non-nuclear-weapon states should be
provided with universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory and legally
binding assurance, by all nuclear weapon states, against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances. We support the
establishment and maintenance of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, including
the Middle East Nuclear Weapon Free zone.
Ethiopia also firmly believes that developing countries should
advance on the use of Nuclear Energy to support their socio-economic
development under safeguards administered by the International Atomic
Energy Agency. It is important to strengthen mechanisms to support
developing countries in terms of human resource development and
provision of feasible technologies to generate Nuclear Energy forpeaceful
purposes to enable them achieve their development objectives.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Ethiopia would like to seize this
opportunity to call on all parties of the NPT to work toward achieving a
productive outcome in the 2020 Review Conference on the basis of trust
and mutual understanding to create a world free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction.
I thank you