Mr. Chairman,
Please allow me to begin by congratulating you on your designation to the position of Chair
of this first Preparatory Committee. You can be assured of my country’s support.
France associates itself wi
~ 7 ~
Given North Korea’s irresponsible and provocative strategy, France supported the United
Nations Security Council resolutions and the European Union decisions, which firmly reacted
by substantially strengthening the sanctions regime. A total of 41 North Korean citizens and 7
entities are currently under sanctions.
France has also participated in efforts to update the export control lists and to adopt
Resolution 2325 related to Committee 1540.
In the area of nuclear disarmament, France continues to comply with its commitments under
Article VI of the NPT, in line with the gradual approach to nuclear disarmament.
We have co-sponsored the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2310 (2016), which
endorses the moratoria on nuclear tests of the five nuclear-weapon States and reaffirms that
their simulation programmes are in line with the fundamental obligations of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). This resolution also recalls the negative
security assurances granted in 1995 to non-nuclear-weapon States in compliance with their
non-proliferation commitments.
During the 71st Session of the UN General Assembly, France has supported concrete and
pragmatic initiatives on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) and nuclear disarmament
verification, largely supported by the international community. France has also actively
contributed to the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification (IPNDV)
which increases dialogue between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States on
technical challenges related to nuclear disarmament verification.
France has also pursued dialogue and cooperation with nuclear-weapon States. Both are key
for strengthening mutual trust. A fifth P5 Conference was held in Washington D.C. on 14 and
15 September 2016. For the first time, discussions were also initiated between nuclearweapon
States on doctrines and strategic stability.
Last but not least, in compliance with nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation standards
and good practices, France has also continued to work on the responsible development of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the areas of industry, research and training. Particularly, in
collaboration with the IAEA, France has opened its research reactors to students and scientists
from Morocco, Slovenia, Tunisia, Indonesia, Algeria, and other agreements are being
finalized. France is likewise committed to States that are developing their infrastructure with a
view to engage in or revitalize their nuclear energy programme, and in support of non-energy
programmes such as the use of radiation therapy in fighting cancer or the disused radioactive
sources. 
~ 8 ~
Mr. Chairman,
2/- Since 2015, the strategic context has deteriorated. Our collective responsibility must
be to preserve and strengthen the non-proliferation regime and the gradual approach of
nuclear disarmament.
This effort is in everyone’s interest as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery continues to threaten international peace and security.
By carrying out two nuclear tests in 2016, intensifying its ballistic missile launches (26
launches in 2016 and 7 in 2017), diversifying its means of delivery and expanding their reach,
North Korea’s leadership has demonstrated its determination to provide the DPRK with an
operational nuclear weapon, in complete violation of several United Nations Security Council
resolutions. By doing so, North Korea threatens both regional and international security and
stability.
In Syria, more than 100 cases of chemical weapons uses by the Syrian army have been
reported since the beginning of the war. Syria’s violations of the Chemical Weapons
Convention are unacceptable and weaken the international non-proliferation regime.
Moreover, the lack of cooperation of the Syrian authorities with the IAEA since the June 2011
resolution of the Board of Governors prevents the international community to resolve
outstanding issues on Syria’s past and current nuclear activities.
In the same region, the pursuit of Iran’s ballistic missile programme at a brisk pace
compromises regional stability and prevents confidence from being restored.
In addition, France has noted with concern the emergence of initiatives that are dividing
States Parties to the NPT. The instrumentalisation of the “humanitarian” approach to nuclear
disarmament aimed at promoting a nuclear weapons prohibition movement, which does not
take into account the security context. This is inconsistent with the step-by-step approach set
forth in Article VI of the NPT.
Unlike these initiatives, France reaffirms its support for the gradual and pragmatic approach
to nuclear disarmament, in line with Article VI of the NPT. Progress in nuclear disarmament
requires that everyone undertakes the necessary efforts to reinforce regional and international
stability, taking into account the principle of undiminished security for all.
Mr. Chairman,
3/- The NPT can only be strengthened with concrete and realistic measures, in the
framework of a balanced approach to its three pillars: 
~ 9 ~
To preserve the international security architecture, States Parties to the NPT should adopt a
firm and determined response to all proliferation crises:
We must act before the DPRK acquires an operational nuclear weapon, which could happen
during this review cycle. Each of us must be aware of this fact and take responsibility.
Iran should implement the JCPOA with the utmost rigour and transparency. All States Parties
to the NPT have a role to play in this regard, by monitoring the implementation of Iran’s
commitments, as regularly reported by the IAEA.
France attaches particular importance to the constant enhancement and universalization of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement of the IAEA and its Additional Protocol, which jointly
constitute the verification standard. France calls on all States that have not yet done so to
conclude an Additional Protocol.
With regard to nuclear disarmament, let me outline some priorities:
The negotiation at the Conference on Disarmament of an FMCT is a crucial and irreplaceable
to concrete progress towards a world without nuclear weapons. It is the next logical step
towards nuclear disarmament.
The early entry into force of the CTBT is also a priority for my country. In this regard, I
would like to commend the excellent work of the Provisional Technical Secretariat of the
CTBTO and its concrete contribution to detecting North Korea’s latest tests. I call on all
States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT and engage with its Technical
Secretariat.
Moreover, the United States and Russia still possess nearly 90% of the world’s nuclear
arsenals. These two counties should pursue their reduction efforts following the expiry of the
New Start Treaty in 2021. As the President of the French Republic stated in his speech in
Istres on 19 February 2015: “If the level of the other arsenals, particularly those of Russia
and the United States, were to fall one day to a few hundred weapons, France would respond
accordingly, as it always has”.
Additionally, discussions between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States on
nuclear disarmament verification help to enhance common understanding and confidence
among States Parties to the NPT. This is the aim of the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament Verification (IPNDV).
With regard to expectations related to the third-pillar, we should continue to promote a
responsible and sustainable development of nuclear energy, which should take place under the
best safety, security, and non-proliferation conditions and be respectful of the environment. 
~ 10 ~
Mr. Chairman,
Dear Colleagues,
We want to work with all of you in a constructive effort to achieve these goals during this
review cycle beginning in Vienna today. In this regard, we look forward to constructive
dialogue between all States Parties to the NPT.
Thank you for your attention./. 