Chair,
Please allow me to begin by congratulatmg you on your designation as Chair of this second
Preparatory Committee. You can be certain of France's full support.
France fully associates itseIf with the statement of the European Union. I would like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.
Chair,
1/ At a time when the international security environment continues to deteriorate, the
consolidation of a law-based international order and the preservation of the integrity of
existing non-proliferation standards are crucial. It is important to unambiguously reaffirm
the authority of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The NPT
remains the comerstone of our collective security arcitecture. It represents an irreplaceable
bulwark against proliferation crises.
The threat represented by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems has, alas, grown.
Last year, North Korea carried out increasing numbers of destabilizing acti'vities and
continued its illegal nuclear and ballistic programmes, in total violation of numerous United
6
Nations Security Council resolutions. We need to remain united and determined to work for
the complete, ve.rifiable and irreversible dismantlement of North Korea's nuclear and ballistic
programmes, in accordance with the resolutions of the UN Security Council. In this respect,
we welcome the recent statements and expressions of opemess to the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula. It is essential that they are followed with concrete gestures on the part of
North Korea towards sincere negotiations. The NPT review cycle needs to continue to grant
the highestpriorityto the settlement ofthis crisis.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) concluded with Iran is a robust nonproliferation
agreement and an asset for international peace and security. It needs to be
preserved and continue to be strictly implemented by all parties, under rigorous IAEA
supervision. However, France is deeply concerned by the rapid development, both in number
and in quality, of the Iranian ballistic programme, and by the tansfer of missiles towards
other countries and non-State actors in the region. [ran must cease such activities and comply
with all relevant UN Security CounciI resolutions.
Lastly, in Syria, the intolerable violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention considerably
undermine the international non-proliferation regime. Tis behaviour makes it all the more
essential to shed Iight on past and present nuclear activities of Syria and on possible ties with
North Korea.
It is our collective responsibility, in the light of these challenges, to do our utmost to reaffum
the intangible nature of the non-proliferation rule and make the perpetrators of any violations
accountable. There can be no impunity. These are the objectives that my country continues to
pursue, both in the field and in multilateral forums.
Chair,
2/ I would now like to report on France's implementation of its commitments, in
accordance with the 2010 Action Plan. France contiuues to comply fully virith its NPT
obIigations, including those specifically linked to its status as anuclear-weapon State.
a) In the field of non-proliferation, France has continued a determined policy aimed at
responding with the uttnost firmness to current threats and continues to be watchfiil about the
rigorous implementation of non-proliferation commitments that have been made. This is
7
notably the case in exercising our responsibilities as permanent member of the {JN Security
Council. ..i
b) In accordance with a step-by-step, realistic approach to nuclear disarmament, France
has continued implementing its commitments under Article W of the NPT. France
remains commi'Ued to the objective of a world without nuclear weapons when conditions
allow, and has thus actively supported initiatives since the first Preparatory Committee in
May 2017 witb the aim of promoting gradual, realistic progress. I particularly have in mind
our participation in the work of the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT) High Level
Expert Preparatory Group. I am also g of our contribution to various activities on
ve:rification of nuclear disarmament. These activities are important to build confidence and
ensure the credibility of any future commitments. France has, moreover, worked to maintain
dialogue with nuclear-weapon States, particularly concerning doctrines and strategic stability.
These efforts are essential to strengthening mutual understandmg.
c) Drawing on its mastery of an nuclear technologies, France has continued to work to
support the responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in accordance
with the bighest standards and best practices of nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation.
My countg supports the important work of the IAEA for the promotion of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and has heightened its international cooperation efforts, as well as knowledge
transfers, in compliance with the provisions of the NPT.
Lastly, Chair,
3/ I would now like to turn towards 2020. The NPT can only be strengthened with concrete
and realistic measures as part of a balanced and integrated approach to its three pillars. Our
road map is clear:
Firstly, the States Parties to the NPT should adopt a firm and united response to all the
proliferation crises.
The top priority has to be the settlement of North Korean crisis. That is why France, along
virith other partners, has taken the initiative of a joint statement, in the same spirit as last
year. Without prejudice to other processes or channels of dialogue, this revised statement is
8
open to co-sponsorship by all States, which can thus reaffirm their commitment to the
integrity ofthe NPT.
Concerning the JCPOA, we call upon all parties to preserve tbis essential inent and
implement it as rigorously and transparently as possible, under strict IAEA supervision.
France attaches particular importance to continuous strengthe.wig of the IAEA safeguards
system. France calls on all the States that have not yet done so to conclude an Additional
Protocol.
b) Secondly, France has several priorities as regards nuclear disarmament with aviewto
2020:
The first is to restore the constructive and inclusive multilateral dialogue. Contrmy to
recent sfiBmmtizinBinitiatives, such a dialogue requires agreementon the objective of a
world without nudear weapons with nnrliminisherl security for all, as well as on the
conditions to create in order to acbieve that. It has to be based on respect for each country and
regiorls security interests, taking into account the fact that nuclear deterrence continues to be
an essential component of stability and international security.
In terms of steps forward, the negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) at the
Conference on Disamament under the Shannon mandate is an essential aspect. At a time
when the spectre of anew mms race looms, the relevance of such an instrumentremains total.
The early entry into force of the CTBT is also a key priority. I call upon all States concerned
to sign and ratify this instrument and to work with the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO).
Meanwbile, the United States and Russia, wbich still possess almost 90% of the world's
nuclear weapons, need to continue their reduction efforts, even after2021 when the New
Start 'ueaty expires. We are also fully committed to the preservation of the IntermediateRange
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, wbich makes a crucial contribution to euro-atlantic
stability.
9
c) Lastly, with regard to expectations on the third pillar, we need to continue promoting
responsible and sustainable development of civil nuclear energy, in optimN safe,ty, security,
and non-proliferation conditions and with respect for the environment. It is with tbis in mind
that we will be presenting, along with other partners, an initiative on governing civil nuclear
cooperation in order to share best practices.
Mr Chairman,
At the end of the day, the objective for 2020 is clear: preserving and strengthening the
authority of the NPT. In this respect, there is no other path than the demanding one of
cooperation and consensus in order to live up to our collective responsibilities.
Thank you.