Check against delivery!
STATEMENT OF HUNGARY
by
Ambassador Dr. György Molnár
Special Representative of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
for Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
at the Second Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
United Nations
Geneva, 24 April 2018
– 2 –
Mr. Chairman,
Let me join previous speakers in warmly congratulating you on your election and assure you of
our full support. We also commend you for the extensive preparatory work aimed at achieving
a successful outcome of the second Preparatory Committee. Hungary fully associates itself with
the statement of the EU and that of Australia to be delivered on behalf of the Vienna Group of
10. Therefore, I would like to make only a few remarks from our national perspective.
Mr. Chairman,
During almost five decades of its existence the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has
proved to be the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, multilateral nuclear
disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The fact that the Review Conference to be
held in 2020, will mark the 50th anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT is yet another
reason to recommit ourselves to the fulfilment of the objectives of the Treaty. The
comprehensive Action Plan adopted by the 2010 RevCon for follow-on actions across the three
pillars continues to provide us with a good basis to do so. Therefore we call on all States parties
to take a flexible approach in order to ensure the successful outcome of the current review cycle.
Since the three pillars of the NPT are equally essential, interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Hungary attaches equal importance to each of them and strives towards their balanced
implementation.
As far as multilateral nuclear disarmament is concerned, we are convinced that Article VI of
the NPT continues to serve as the fundamental framework to achieve the ultimate goal of a
world free of nuclear weapons. However, it is our strong conviction that this goal cannot be
reached without taking into account the global security context and the role nuclear deterrence
plays in the present complex international environment.
The different views on nuclear disarmament are well known. We are convinced that in this field
we can only make progress if we focus on areas where there is common ground. In our view
only an inclusive progressive approach that is gradual and consists of practical steps that fully
engage nuclear weapon states and promote international security and stability can provide us
with such a platform. These concrete steps include the entry into force of the CTBT, a ban on
the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons, as well as, making progress on nuclear
disarmament verification and transparency and confidence building measures. In this respect
we highly value the work of the FMCT High Level Expert Preparatory Group. We also look
forward to contributing to the work of the Group of Governmental Experts on the role of
verification in advancing nuclear disarmament and the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament Verification (IPNDV).
Mr. Chairman,
Concerning the proliferation of nuclear weapons, Hungary is of the view that horizontal and
vertical proliferation risks must be addressed in an effective way to preserve the credibility of
the NPT. The role of the IAEA’s comprehensive safeguards system is crucial in this field.
– 3 –
The nuclear and ballistic missile program of the DPRK constitutes a grave threat to regional
and international security. We hope that recent diplomatic efforts can bring us closer to defusing
this serious challenge to the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
In our view the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action aimed at ensuring the exclusively peaceful
nature of Ian’s nuclear program is in full conformity with the principles of the NPT and creates
a positive example for resolving controversial questions within the broader framework of the
Treaty. Therefore we support the preservation of the JCPOA and its continued and full
implementation of the by all sides.
With regards to regional issues Hungary is in favor of the establishment of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. We support any effort to
create the conditions for launching this process at a conference to be attended by all states of
the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by them.
Mr. Chairman,
As a country with an active peaceful nuclear program with plans for further expansion of its
capacities, Hungary recognizes that all States parties have an inalienable right for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in conformity with the provisions of the NPT. At the same time, Hungary
has a keen interest in ensuring that all actors maintain and work towards the highest possible
standards in all aspects of nuclear safety and security that are enablers for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We support the work of the IAEA, which has a central role in this field. We
also take an active part in a number of initiatives and fora that play a supplementary but
important role.
.