I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this Prepcom meeting. My delegation would also like to associate itself with the statement made on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States by the delegation of Cuba.
We gather here today for the final preparation before the 2010 Review Conference with a view to critically review our previous work, carefully take stock of the present situation and appropriately chart our future direction in implementing the three pillars of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
We are all witnesses, in the past decade, of some Nuclear Weapons States (NWS) which continue not only to rely on nuclear weapons in their military doctrine, but also to modernize, advance and develop new type of nuclear weapons.
During the same period, we also witnessed the intensifying campaign by civil society, parliaments, mayors, think-tanks and academic/research institutions to achieve "getting to zero" of nuclear weapon.
Today, there are positive indications emanating from the NWS to address nuclear disarmament. We welcome the recent statements by NWS on their intentions to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons and we look forward to seeing urgent and tangible actions to achieve this goal.
This is a good starting point and we must sei2;e the opportunity. It is time for us to move from a decade of deadlock to a decade of decisions and implementation for the benefit of all.
We must begin by reiterating that the only viable path forward is to undertake a balanced, comprehensive and non-discriminatory approach to the three pillars of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Since the 2000 NPT Revcon, the progress towards nuclear disarmament has remained slow. To achieve credible and incremental steps toward nuclear disarmament, we urge the NWS, in particular the US and the Russian Federation, to exercise leadership and commit to further negotiations on strategic nuclear weapons. We welcome their Joint Statement on 1 April 2009, in which both sides decided to begin negotiations to replace START I Treaty.
On the CTBT, we welcome the intention of the US to immediately pursue a ratification of the CTBT. If the US keeps its promise to push for ratification of the CTBT, it will serve as a catalyst for similar action by other states listed in Annex II.
As the Conference on Disarmament (CD) seems to be moving toward a consensus, a package that will include the start of negotiation on the basis of the Shannon report and the mandate therein, could be a good basis to move forward to achieve a verifiable FMCT.
To achieve complete nuclear disarmament, benchmarks should be set, timetables drawn up and specific steps agreed upon by all States parties to the NPT. With the growing momentum toward a nuclear-weapon-free world, there is a political opening to start the process towards achieving a Nuclear Weapon Convention (NWC).
Mr. Chairman,
Whatever are the motivations of States to seek nuclear weapons, the very existence of nuclear weapons, regardless of whose hands they are in poses risks and a threat to humankind.
If NWS continue to keep their nuclear arsenals;, the NNWS will always face the possibility of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons by NWS. Therefore, the proposal by the NNWS for universal, non-conditional and legally-binding security assurances should continue to be pursued as a matter of priority.
In order to prevent new States from acquiring nuclear weapons, it is essential to outlaw nuclear weapons. This will not only prevent new States from posessing nuclear weapons, but also to push NWS to expedite their commitment and obligations to nuclear disarmament.
If States are committed to fully implementing the comprehensive safeguards agreement and the Additional Protocol, it would demonstrate transparency which could contribute to the strengthening of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and to facilitating cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
While we welcome the entry into force of the Central Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, we express dissatisfaction with the slow progress of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, and encourage all States parties to take concrete steps to establish such a zon€i based on the 1995 Middle East resolution.
On the Korean Peninsula, suspicion will continue to grow if concerned parties do not meet and negotiate following the launch by DPRK last month. Therefore, we again call upon them to resume dialogue within the context of the Six Party Talks, which stalled last year, in order to find a peaceful solution to the DPRK nuclear issue.
Mr. Chairman,
As part of a political bargain made within the NPT context, Article IV clearly stipulates that the transfer or use of nuclear equipment or material for peaceful purposes must be subject to full-scope IAEA safeguards and it does not prohibit their transfer or use based on "sensitivity".
As long as the process of developing peaceful uses of nuclear energy is conducted under the full safeguards, consistent with the safety and security measures set out by IAEA, there should be no reason to be worried if an increasing number of countries choose to develop nuclear energy.
With reference to finding a peaceful solution to the Iran nuclear issue, we are very much encouraged by the new approach of the US and the readiness of concerned parties to resume dialogue and negotiations without preconditions, and on the basis of mutual interests and respect
Indonesia calls upon all States which are not yet party to the NPT to accede to the Treaty at the earliest possible date, particularly those States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. It is regrettable that certain States Parties of the NPT have endorsed nuclear cooperation with a non-State party, thus providing an incentive for that country to remain outside the regime, and in essence, rewarding such behavior.
Mr. Chairman,
On procedural issues, we welcome the candidacy of Ambassador Libran Nuevas Cabactulan of the Philippines as President-designate of the next NPT Revcon. We hope that issues related to the organization of the 2010 Revcon, particularly the provisional agenda, could be agreed upon at this Prepcom. It is also vital that this Prepcom develop substantive recommendations based on a consensual approach.
Mr. Chairman,
We would like to underline that Indonesia does not wish to see another failure in 2010. While we are ready to address the developments affecting the operation of the NPT and since there was no substantive result in the 2005 NPT Revcon, the Final Documents of the 1995 and 2000 Revcons should serve as a 'benchmark' for our future work and should be duly reflected in the agenda of the 2010 Revcon.
In conclusion, taking into account the need for improving the effectiveness of the strengthened review process, we encourage all States parties to make every effort to reach a successful outcome at the 2010 NPT Review Conference.