Please Check Against Delivery.

Statement by H.E. Mr. Hamid Baeidinejad
Director General for Political and International Security Affairs,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
At the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
New York, 30 April 2014
In the Name of God, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful

Mr. Chairman,
I would like to begin by congratulating you on your well-deserved election to preside over this
important meeting and assuring you of the full support of my delegation. I am confident that with
your vast diplomatic skill particularly in the field of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament,
this session would successfully conclude and would achieve its objectives.
I wish also to associate my delegation at this outset with the statement made yesterday by the
H.E Foreign Minister of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
According to Decision 1 on Strengthening the Review Process for the Treaty adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference, the purpose of the Preparatory Committee meetings is "To
consider principles, objectives and ways in order to promote the full implementation of the
Treaty, as well as its universality, and to make recommendations thereon to the Review
Conference." To accomplish this mandate, we need to formulate concrete substantive
recommendations, which can include those recommendations identified in the decision on 
principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, adopted on 11 May
1995 including on the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East as well as the
implementation status of the 64-point plan of action adopted in 2010. Here I need to express the
appreciation and gratitude of my delegation to the non- governmental organizations who have
done substantive valuable works in this regard which we can benefit from them in our common
exercise.

Mr. Chairman,
In such a review addressing the measures related to nuclear disarmament would certainly receive
particular priority. Nuclear disarmament leading to a nuclear-weapon-free world continues to be
the essential objective of the Treaty and nuclear-weapon States have primary responsibility in
this regard. It is a source of grave concern that after almost 45 years of entry into force of the
NPT, no single serious step has been taken by nuclear-weapon States towards fulfilling their
obligations and unequivocal undertakings. On the contrary continued program of some nuclearweapon
States in conducting research and the development of new types of nuclear weapons,
including through conducting nuclear-weapon-tests in alternative ways, modernizing their
existing nuclear weapons, nuclear-weapon-sharing, improving the role of nuclear weapons in
their military and security doctrines, assisting some non-parties to the Treaty in developing their
nuclear weapons through transferring nuclear equipment, materials and know-how, as well as
their persistent refusal even to start negotiations on nuclear disarmament are quite contrary to the
spirit and letter of the NPT. Such activities and policies would not only undermine the objectives
of the NPT, but would also put integrity and credibility of the treaty into jeopardy. Nuclearweapon
States should reverse this trend and demonstrate their strong and genuine political will in
support of negotiations on nuclear disarmament by adoption of practical nuclear disarmament
measures, including through commencement of dismantling their nuclear arsenals.
In this context, the 2015 Review Conference should take advantage of the momentum created by
the first-ever high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament held last
September. Strong supports for nuclear disarmament at that meeting reflected the strength of
demands for nuclear disarmament and proved once again that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons remains the highest priority. Follow-up to that high-level meeting, the adoption of
Resolution 68/32 of the General Assembly, containing the 3-point proposals, presented by His
Excellency President Hassan Rouhani of the Islamic Republic of Iran, on behalf of the NonAligned
Movement, represents an appropriate road-map to refresh and direct all international
efforts on nuclear disarmament. In this context, we also recall the decision by the General
Assembly to declare 26 September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons. The Preparatory Committee should acknowledge the importance of this initiative in 
furthering the objective of Treaty on nuclear disarmament. we strongly call therefore on the
Conference on Disarmament to agree on a comprehensive and balanced program of work,
providing also for an urgent commencement of negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
nuclear weapons to prohibit their possession, development, production, acquisition, testing,
stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use, and to provide for their destruction.
Mr. Chairman,
Universality of the Treaty is quite essential in realizing its objective on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Therefore, there should be strong recommendations in this regard by the
Preparatory Committee. This is essential in particular in such volatile regions as the Middle East,
where the nuclear weapons of the only non-party to the Treaty in this region poses a serious and
continuing threat to the security of neighboring and other States and remains the only obstacle
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone therein. The 2010 NPT plan of action
for the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East was a step forward after a long
delay in its implementation. However, despite the readiness of all countries of the region to
participate in the 2012 conference on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, the refusal of Israel to participate in the conference, in total defiance of NPT
unanimous decision and call of the international community, seriously challenged the
implementation of this Resolution. This of course in no way exonerates the conveners from their
responsibility, as the review conferences of the Treaty have repeatedly reaffirmed that the
implementation of the 1995 Resolution remains one of the main objectives of the Treaty. We
firmly believe that an agreed plan of action and timetable for the universality of the Treaty in the
Middle East should be one of the main priorities of the 2015 NPT review conference.
Mr. Chairman,
The full realization of the inalienable right of all parties to the Treaty to develop, research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination is among the
fundamental objectives of the Treaty. This requires full compliance of all parties in promoting
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in all its aspects and their right to participate in the fullest
possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as well as technical cooperation among themselves or with
international organizations. According to the Treaty, nothing shall be interpreted as affecting this
inalienable right, and all State parties, in particular developed States have an obligation to fully
respect this right and facilitate its realization, including through transferring of nuclear
equipment, material and know-how to developing States parties. It is quite essential that in the
same context, the NPT review conferences have all reaffirmed the sovereign right of each State 
party to define its national nuclear energy policy including fuel-cycle policy which should be
respected by all other States parties to the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, my delegation stands ready to fully cooperate with you and all parties towards a
successful meeting this year and formulating concrete recommendations in support of the full
and balanced implementation of the Treaty and the decisions of the Review Conferences.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 