•
--Please check against delivery --
Statement by H.E. Mr. G. Hossein Dehghani,
Director General for International Political and Secnrity Affairs and
Head of the Delegation of the Islamic Repnblic of Iran
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, 3 May 2017
In the Name of God, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to begin by congratulating you on your election as the Chairman of
this important meeting. I also assure you of the full support and cooperation of
my delegation. I am confident that under your able leadership this session of the
Preparatory Committee will succeed.
I wish also to associate my delegation with the statement of the Non-Aligned
Movement delivered by the distinguished representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Chairman,
At the start of the current NPT review process, the Islamic Republic of Iran
wishes to reiterate, once again, the importance of this Treaty and the dire need for
the full implementation of all its provisions and the complete realization of its
goals and purposes.
The coincidence of the 2020 Review Conference with the 50th anniversary of the
Treaty will provide an important opportunity to review its implementation, assess
the realization of its purposes, evaluate the implementation of the decisions and
commitments made in its Review Conferences, identify impediments in the way
of its full implementation and finally decide how to overcome these impediments.
Reviewing the challenges before the full implementation of the NPT in the past
47 years, I would like to highlight the relative success of the Treaty in preventing
the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. At the same time, Iran
underscores that this relative success is achieved ONLY through the full
compliance of the non-nuclear-weapon-States parties to the NPT with their nonproliferation
obligations under the Treaty. Therefore, this is their success in
acting responsibly, in keeping their promises, and in fulfilling their treaty
obligations in good faith. As a non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty, Iran
highly values this success.
Nevertheless, the primary failure of the NPT and the main challenge before its
full implementation is the non-compliance of the nuclear-weapon States with
their nuclear disarmament obligations under the Treaty and their failure in
fulfilling their respective commitments undertaken within its Review
1 
Conferences, in particular in 1995, 2000 and 20lO. Given the fact that the
negotiating history and the text and context of the Treaty as well as the content of
the outcome documents of its Review Conferences refer to the objective of a
nuclear-weapon-free world as the most important incentive of the States
negotiating the Treaty, this is an extremely important issue that requires our
special attention.
Non-nuclear-weapon States ratified the Treaty on the understanding that its
implementation would and should lead to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons. Definitely, they never intended to become party to a Treaty that divides
the world forever into nuclear-weapon-haves and have-nots. Nor did they ever
intend to be part of a Treaty that fails to put an end to the possession of such
inhumane weapons by a few.
My delegation wishes to reiterate once again that the purpose of the Treaty is not
only to prevent non-nuclear-weapon States from acquiring nuclear weapons, it is
equally or even more importantly about an inherently linked objective to this
goal, that is disarming nuclear-weapon States. Accordingly, any assumption that
nuclear weapons are legitimately possessed by a few or the indefinite extension
of the Treaty implies the indefinite possession of such weapons by a few is
incompatible with the object and purpose of the Treaty. Similarly, in our view,
the reduction of nuclear weapons could never account for the implementation of
explicit obligations under Article VI of the Treaty.
Article VI requires "each of the Parties to pursue negotiations in good faith ... to
nuclear disarmament and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under
strict and effective international control." The implementation of Article VI
obligations is neither optional nor is it conditional on anything, including such
so-called concepts as "strategic stability" or "international security environment".
It is a legal obligation. The International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the Advisory
Opinion of 8 July 1996 unanimously decided that "There exists an obligation to
pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control".
My delegation warns that the persistent lack of progress on nuclear disarmament
as well as on issues such as vertical proliferation, including modernization of
nukes and development of mini-nukes would certainly deepen the already
existing frustration of non-nuclear-weapon States parties and challenge the very
survival, relevance and integrity of the Treaty.
Reiterating our full support for negotiating a comprehensive convention on
nuclear weapons to prohibit their possession, development, production,
acquisition, testing, stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use and to provide for
their destruction, we would like to stress that the ongoing "United Nations
conference to negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons,
leading towards their total elimination" should be considered a collective protest
2 
#
by a large number of non-nuclear-weapon States Parties that are frustrated from
47-year non-compliance of nuclear-weapon States with their nuclear
disarmament obligations.
We hope that this situation would compel nuclear-weapon States to come to
conclusion that they cannot remain consistently inconsistent with their nuclear
disarmament obligations. This, indeed, is an alarming situation, and cannot
continue indefinitely.
Taking into account the high importance of the long-delayed implementation of
nuclear disarmament obligation for a large number of States parties, the 2020
Review Conference should consider this issue as its highest priority. In any case,
the end result should be a legally binding and time-bound action plan, as it was
suggested by NAM, ensuring transparent, irreversible and internationally
verifiable elimination of all nuclear weapons worldwide.
Mr. Chairman,
While the increase in the number of States parties to the Treaty is of course a
great achievement, failure in gaining its universality remains a serious challenge
to its effectiveness. As "zero" is "the only safe number of nuclear weapons on the
planet", indeed, "zero is the only acceptable number of countries outside the
Treaty".
My delegation highlights the importance of the universalization of the Treaty in
achieving its objectives, in particular in such a volatile region as the Middle
East, where nuclear weapons and unsafeguarded nuclear facilities and activities
of the Israeli regime continue to threaten the peace and security of the region and
beyond. This approach was acknowledged by the 2000 Review Conference when
it reaffirmed "the importance ofIsrael's accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty
and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive IAEA
safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the
Middle East." An approach that was also reaffirmed by the 2010 Review
Conference. The 2020 Review Conference should consider this issue on a priority
basis.
Expressing deepest concern over the persistent failures in implementing the 1995
Resolution on the Middle East over the past 22 years, in particular the inability of
the 2015 Review Conference in adopting its final document because of the
objection to section on the Middle East by certain States parties, Iran would like
to emphasize the importance of this resolution as an essential and integral
element of the outcome of the 1995 Conference and a basis upon which the
Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote in 1995. Iran strongly believes
that, as reaffirmed by successive Review Conferences of the Treaty, the
resolution remains valid until its goals and objectives are achieved.
3 
As the initiator of the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East in 1974, Iran stresses that the only practical way for the
implementation of the 1995 resolution and the establishment of such a zone is to
exert and maintain, by the international community of States, a sustained pressure
on the Israeli regime, to compel it to accede, promptly and unconditionally as a
non-nuclear weapon party, to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to place all of its
nuclear activities and installations under the IAEA full-scope safeguards.
Mr. Chairman,
On the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, no one can deny the large
increase in the use of nuclear energy worldwide. However, we do not share the
assumption that this is only due to the implementation of the relevant provisions
of the Treaty. In this regard, and stressing the important role played by the IAEA
in supporting the use of nuclear energy by developing countries, we draw
attentions to the limitations posed by many developed countries, under the socalled
export control regimes, on the transfer of nuclear know-how, technology,
equipment and material to developing States parties, in full contradiction with the
provisions of the Treaty. Such restrictions violate the inalienable rights of
developing States parties and hamper their economic or technological
development and, therefore, have to come to an end.
Taking into account the importance of the full realization of the inherent right of
States parties under Article IV, we urge the 2020 Review Conference to examine
this issue and take concrete decisions to ensure the full and non-discriminatory
implementation of the Treaty in regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
As it has been clarified in the course of JCPOA negotiations and afterward, Iran's
nuclear programme has been peaceful activities by a state party to the NPT under
article IV of the Treaty and it has never been a proliferation challenge
whatsoever. So, the manufactured crisis in this regard was over when all parties
showed their will to end it up. From now on all parties must remain committed to
their undertakings under the deal, as Iran has done so. Since a confusing
reference on JCPOA and Resolution 2231 made in a statement, I feel obliged to
clarity that these documents have nothing to do with the prompt ratification of
additional protocol by Iran and Iranian missile testing that is completely a
legitimate defensive conventional exercise.
In conclusion, my delegation stands ready to cooperate with you, Mr. Chairman,
and all interested delegations to enable this review cycle of the Treaty to adopt
concrete decisions for the full implementation of all its provisions and the
complete realization of its objectives, in particular nuclear disarmament that
remains as our highest priority.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.
4 