Mr. Chairman,
At the outset I would like to congratulate you for your election as the Chairman of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. I am sure that under your skillful chairmanship this session would have a successful result.
I would like to begin by associating my delegation with the statement already delivered by the distinguished representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement in this Committee on the wide range of issues on three pillars of the NPT, namely nuclear disarmament, peaceful use of nuclear energy as well as the prevention of vertical and horizontal proliferation. Iran fully supports the positions reflected therein.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear weapons pose the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of civilizations. The NPT is the sole near-to-universal multilateral instrument with the membership of all nuclear-weapon States which provides the legal basis to reverse the nuclear arms race and avert the danger of nuclear war, through the achievement of the goal of complete nuclear disarmament with the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
The NPT also provides for a balance between security concerns and the socio-economic requirements for development, especially for developing countries. Article IV of the Treaty as the second pillar guarantees "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty". It furthermore provides for an undertaking by all parties to the Treaty "to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy". This Article also plays a crucial role as the main incentive set forth to encourage non-nuclear-weapon States to join the Treaty and thereby foster the non-proliferation which is the third pillar of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
Today our world remains more than ever alarmed by the threats posed by the continued existence of nuclear weapons as well as a new trend to resort to the threat of use of nuclear weapons as a means to achieve political objectives. In this context, the adoption of the Nuclear Posture Review by the United States was the beginning of this dangerous trend. The US NPR serves as the basis for the nuclear policy of that country in terms of operationalization and planning seriously introduces elements which are contrary to the obligations of the Treaty.
This Posture particularly recognises the critical role of nuclear weapons by stating that "nuclear weapons capabilities possess unique properties that give the United States option to hold at risk classes of targets important to achieve strategic and political objectives". It has furthermore specified certain countries, among them non-nuclear weapon States party to the NPT, to be as real and potential targets to be involved in immediate, potential contingencies.
The new Posture furthermore recognised "the need for a revitalized nuclear weapons complex that will be able, if directed, to design, develop, manufacture, and certify new warheads in response to new national requirements; and maintain readiness to resume underground nuclear testing if required." There is no doubt that the decision to develop such program runs contrary to the nuclear-weapon States' obligations to systematic reduction of nuclear weapons and is an obvious non-compliance with Article VI of the NPT. One may add to this non-compliance, the constant use of false pretexts by various senior officials of the United States to make public and illegal threats of resort to force even the threat to "nuking" or "totally obliterating" against the non-nuclear weapon States, in total contempt of the NPT, international law and fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. These rude threats have even entered a new phase with revealing the consideration of nuclear strikes in the United States' aggressive policy.
The United States and some other nuclear weapon States are still dangerously persisting on yesterday's doctrines and the traditional role of nuclear deterrence. They have kept the fate of civilization and of humanity itself under horror and panic. By insisting on keeping nuclear bombs, nuclear weapon States themselves are the source of proliferation. The non-nuclear weapon States who have already forgone nuclear option, are rightly asking why these terrible weapons exist. Under what circumstances and for what purpose could the use of the world's most destructive mass-terror weapons ever be justified?
The US is not alone in violating the Article VI obligations and the undertakings of the 2000 NPT Conference. France has also announced the addition of a new nuclear-armed ballistic missile-carrying submarine to its nuclear arsenals. The French president is quoted as saying "French nuclear forces are a key element in Europe's security." It appears that this country in defiance of its international obligations is seeking to find and define new roles and missions for its nuclear forces in order to justify the continued retention of them in the post-cold war era. In so doing, they have even resorted to irresponsible methods such as manipulation of intelligence and fear to promote programs that their people would otherwise not support.
The decision of the United Kingdom to renew and further develop its nuclear weapons capability, by approving the Trident Project, is also in full contravention with Article VI of the NPT and in defiance with the unanimous decision of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. The Trident Project can generate and in fact expand nuclear arms race beyond the traditional rivalry between the two most powerful nuclear weapon States, thus is a special source of concern for the international community and is a clear set back for the global efforts to bolster nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear weapons should not imply political clout and capability to shape and influence world events or change the decisions of sovereign States. Holding on and expanding nuclear arsenals, should be condemned rather than condoned or tolerated. Any increase in nuclear capability should equal a reduction in political credibility. As long as such weapons are in the stockpiles of nuclear-weapon States, no one on the earth has any security. It is imperative therefore, to move now with a concerted and firm resolve to stop and reverse this fast pace drive.
Certain nuclear weapon States have tried to create smokescreens in the international fora, including the NPT Review process to deflect attention from their abysmal record and policies.
The NPT States Parties are convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for the prevention of dangers of nuclear war. The international community has the right to be assured that the nightmare that visited upon the people of Hiroshima and Nagasaki will never happen again. The nuclear-weapon States in this respect have the basic and fundamental obligations to particularly implement relevant provisions of the Treaty stipulated in its Articles I and VI to effectively aiming at creating a world completely free from the horror of nuclear weapons.
Since the Preparatory Committee "decides that it understands the reference in the agenda to "reaffirming the need for full compliance with the Treaty" to mean that it will consider compliance with all the provisions of the Treaty, my delegation would like to put on the record that it would pursue vigorously this issue particularly the non-compliance of certain nuclear weapon States with their obligations under Article I, III, IV and VI of the Treaty.
I would like to add to the instances of non-compliance with Article VI which I referred above, the following cases:
1. Violation of Article III- Paragraph 2 of this Article stipulates that cooperation of each State Party to the Treaty in providing equipment or material for peaceful purposes is not possible "unless the source or special fissionable material shall be subject to the safeguards required by" the NPT.
However, the US nuclear cooperation with Zionist Regime, as hard evidenced after the agreement reached during the US Energy Secretary's visit to the occupied territories in February 2000, is total disregard with the obligations under the Treaty and the source of real concern for all members of international community and specially the Middle East countries which are all members of the NPT family. Zionist Regime's unsafeguarded nuclear weapon facilities and nuclear arsenal is a real threat to all countries of the region and to the international peace and security. The very recently a new agreement was signed by the director of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, and the chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, enabling Zionist Regime to have access to most of the latest nuclear data and technology available in the U.S which is another US non-compliance with the provisions of the NPT, though it seems that the US has no shy of supporting that regime's nuclear weapon programme and the disclosed "top secret document dated 23 August 1974"
clearly shows the role of the US in equipping Zionist Regime with nuclear weapons in clear contravention with Article I of the NPT.
2.	Non-compliance with Article I- The United States for a long time has been in noncompliance with the obligations undertaken under the Treaty which provides in its Article I "not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons" by transferring hundreds of nuclear weapons to certain non-nuclear weapon States under the NATO umbrella.
The United States' deployed nuclear weapons in other countries are extremely integrated into the military infrastructure of the countries hosting these weapons. Deploying hundreds of nuclear weapons in non-nuclear weapon States and the training of the fighter bomber pilots of the hosting countries to prepare for handling and delivering the US nuclear bombs against the nuclcar as well as non-nuclear weapon States contravenes both letter and spirit of the Treaty and is a clear non-compliance with the NPT. The danger of nuclear incidents by terrorist activities requires a viable solution to deal with such transferred weapons. This has made many including parliaments in these countries to request for the withdrawal of nuclear forces from their territories.
3.	Violation of Article II- The countries who are hosting the US nuclear weapons under the security arrangement either in Europe or in the Far East of Asia are in clear violation of Article II of the NPT which provides that "Each non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty undertakes not to receive the transfer from any transferor whatsoever of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or of control over such weapons or explosive devices directly, or indirectly".
Now that we have on our agenda the issue of non-compliance with all the provisions of the Treaty, it is imperative for the NPT States parties to take the cases of violation of Article II by the NATO members very seriously.
4.	Non-compliance with Article IV -The non-compliance with the Treaty obligations is not limited to the violations of Articles I, II, III and VI and certain States have also constantly violated the provisions of Article IV of the NPT which provides for the international cooperation and transfer of peaceful nuclear technologies to the NPT States Parties. Contrary to such obligations, the US has been at the forefront of the imposition of unilateral restrictions against the NPT States parties, in particular developing countries. Such noncompliance with Article IV of the NPT merits a through consideration by the Review Conference. Likewise, all States parties to the NPT consider the pursuit and development of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to be their inalienable right, and thus can invest human and material resources in this field. Restrictions imposed by nuclear suppliers that have targeted peaceful nuclear programme can affect the entire industry and all possible sources of supply of material and equipment of the NPT States parties thus seriously affecting the development plans particularly in the developing countries. Clear violations of Article IV obligations by certain States in depriving the States parties from the exercise of their inalienable right and illegal as well as unilateral sanctions is a matter of great concern to the developing countries. This issue should seriously be followed in the upcoming Conference.
All of the above-mentioned cases of non-compliance clearly indicate that contrary to politically motivated propaganda, the non-compliance of certain Nuclear Weapon States with their obligations particularly the provisions of Article I, IV and VI of the NPT, i.e. three
pillars of the NPT has put the future of the Treaty at stake. Now the major task of the upcoming Conference according to the present formulation of the agenda should be consideration and adoption of practical measures to prevent such violations in order to preserve the credibility and integrity of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
As there were some references to my country's exclusively peaceful nuclear activities, I would like to elaborate the following points:
-	It is more than five years that a few countries, by making a political issue out of a technical matter, have wasted the IAEA's resources and capabilities which must be dedicated to its fundamental tasks and commitments particularly the acceleration of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Agency should, more than ever, symbolize its commitment and capability not only for the implementation of the Safeguards but also for the facilitation and assistance to promote utilization of nuclear energy as the basic and primary objective of the Agency according to its Statutory mandate. This is a heavy responsibility which must not be overshadowed by some politicized issues.
-	The Islamic Republic of Iran, contrary to the real proliferators of nuclear weapons has done its best including:
A)	full cooperation with the IAEA pertaining to verification of its peaceful nuclear program consist of more than 3000 person-day inspection of its nuclear facilities which is an unprecedented figure in the history of implementation of safeguard agreements.
B)	Committed continuously to its Safeguards Agreement and has implemented, on a voluntary basis, the contents of the Additional Protocol for more than 3 consecutive years.
C)	Sustained sincerely the suspension of its nuclear activities for a long period, with the aim of building confidence which regrettably was misused by certain States to cease Iranian peaceful nuclear programme.
-	The Islamic Republic of Iran, in its continued cooperation with the IAEA has resolved all the outstanding issues within the framework of an agreed Work Plan. It is worth mentioning that each one of these issues was a mere pretext by few States to mislead the public and stage political attack against Iran in the IAEA's Board of Governors in order to portray Iran's peaceful program as a non-peaceful one.
As a result of Iran's commitment to its NPT obligation and cooperation, the IAEA has repeatedly confirmed and reconfirmed that "there is no diversion in the Iranian nuclear program and all declared nuclear activities and materials remains in peaceful purposes." It is a center of Iran's nuclear policy to cooperate with the Agency in accordance with its obligations. Right now that I am making this statement, the IAEA Deputy Director General is in Iran in continuation of our cooperation with the Agency.
Those few States, including the US, who have attempted to deprive Iranian nation from exercising its inalienable rights to peaceful use of nuclear energy, have an abysmal record of violating the NPT obligations: some develop and modernize their
nuclear arsenals in a sustained manner, some others have incorporated the irrational use of nuclear weapons in conventional situations in their defense and security doctrine, some other, though seemingly have no nuclear weapon, are hosting and sharing such inhumane weapons in their territory or under nuclear umbrella through military pacts ajnd finally some share the command and control of the use of nuclear armament in contradiction to their NPT obligations.
-	On the other hand, the Israeli regime, with a history full of aggression, atrocities and occupation, has continued to develop all kinds of weapons of mass destruction in particular nuclear weapons with unambiguous support of the US. Israeli regime's unsafeguarded activities and facilities are a real danger and constant threat against the peoples of the region and to the international peace and stability at large.
-	These above-mentioned facts are just insistences of the non-compliance of those few States that are behind the unfair and illegal measures against Iranian nation.
Iran's support for the NPT is unequivocal and we continue to honor our obligation and exercise our rights to peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Those few certain countries who by their unlawful actions inflicted the damages on the Iranian peaceful nuclear activities, should be held accountable and bear the responsibility of their wrongdoings. The Iranian nation and government has the legitimate right to take legal action in this regard before appropriate international bodies.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I would like to reiterate that Iranian Nation as a peace-loving nation spars no effort toward achieving the world's stability and peace. The power and the capabilities of the Islamic Republic of Iran can contribute to the regional and international peace and stability. In this context, various powers should deal with the issues and challenges that the world is facing today. Iran for its part as a powerful and influential member of international community has been preparing a package of initiatives on international peace and stability, based on the justice, sovereignty and mutual respect which could be the basis for negotiations among the influential powers within the framework of collective commitments. It would be submitted in due course.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.