Mr. President,
My delegation wishes to congratulate you on your election as President of this important Conference. Through our observation of your tireless efforts since your election to this challenging task, it was clear that your experience and your keen concern for the success of the Conference would produce positive results and contribute to the success of this Conference. I would also like to congratulate the Vice-Presidents and members of the Secretariat for their efforts.
and the complete elimination of those weapons will with a certain guarantee against the use or the affirmed that it will be free of Weapons of Mass delivery, and has confirmed its commitment disarmament and non-proliferation following the harshly experience of the Iraqi people due to the policies of the former regime. It obtained aid used Weapons of Mass Destruction
on
My country's delegation endorses the statement delivered by H. E. the Foreign Minister of Indonesia 011 behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement of the Arab Group to be delivered by the Lebanese representative to the Conference. We would like to state that the Government of the Republic of Iraq, based on its belief in the importance of international peace and security, is striving to create a world free of nuclear weapons and supports all efforts in this area, and it considers the 2010 Review Conference to be an important step to nuclear non-proliferation at the international level, the Government of Iraq is keen to make all efforts necessary to make it succeed. I11 this context, Iraq welcomes the Nuclear Security Summit that was convened in Washington, as well as the new START agreement that was signed between the United States and the Russian Federation.
Mr. President,
I
My Government reaffirms its commitment |and respect for international treaties, conventions, and arrangements pertaining to disarmament, arms control, and non- proliferation. In this regard, my Government has taken several legislative and executive measures to translate its obligations and commitments into reality.
Iraq also believes that universal adherence to international agreements on Weapons of Mass Destruction and global compliance to those agreements, without discrimination,
1 provide the international community threat of use of those weapons. Iraq has Destruction and of the means of their to the conventions and treatiesleading to destruction and devastation the country and its people, loss of wealth and the destruction of Iraq's infrastructure.
This Conference is being held at a crucial time for Iraq, as it exerting its efforts with the Security Council to review the remaining restrictions previously imposed on Iraq in the area of disarmament, under the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially Resolutions 687 and 707 (1991). The new Iraq has adopted the policy of permanently discarding the heavy legacy left by the previous regime. It has vowed that this policy is a documented oath in the Iraqi constitution as stipulated in article 9/H that "The Iraqi Government shall respect and implement Iraq's international obligations regarding the non-proliferation, non-development, non-production, and nonuse of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, and shall prohibit associated equipment, materiel, technologies, and delivery systems for use in the development, manufacture, production, and use of such weapons."
In implementing this solid policy, Iraq has fulfilled all its obligations under Security Council resolutions relating to disarmament which led to Security Council resolution 1762 (2007) terminating the mandate of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the special team of IAEA in Iraq. Despite Iraq's effort in getting rid of its weapons of mass destruction and the implementation of Security Council resolutions related to disarmament, there are still some constraints that prevent Iraq benefiting from scientific and technological progress which limit Iraq's potential to be an active member of the International community and Iraq's right to benefit from this progress based on the statute of the IAEA.
In this regard, the Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs addressed a letter to President of the Security Council and the Director-General of the IAEA that included the steps that Iraq has taken and will take in the area of disarmament. The Iraqi government stressed in these letters its commitment and respect of international treaties and conventions related to disarmament and non-proliferation. In asserting this commitment, the Iraqi specialized authorities achieved notable progress in important matters as Iraq has completed its accession to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction. Iraq has also signed the additional protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement of the IAEA on 9th October 2008 and it is now presented to the Iraqi Parliament for its ratification. Until its ratification, Iraq has officially declared on 17th February 2010 its voluntary implementation of the additional protocol effective 17th February 2010 pursuant to article 17 of the Protocol and Iraq has officially informed the IAEA of this decision. Iraq has also signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty on 19,h August 2008. The Security Council issued a Presidential statement on 26th February 2010 welcoming the steps taken by Iraq.
Having taken these measures, Iraq expects the Security Council to act positively in light of the letter of the Director-General of the IAEA addressed to the Security Council on 11th March 2010, in which he asserts the excellent cooperation of Iraq with the IAEA and recommends the adoption of a resolution lifting the remaining restrictions imposed on Iraq related to disarmament.
Mr. President,
The Middle East differs from other regions of the world in that it is a sensitive region of strategic importance and unique economy, thus any weapons escalation in the region would have far-reaching implication for international peace and security. The Middle East has and continues to witness one of the longest contemporary conflicts in the world, the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as other military conflicts and political unrest in the region. Therefore, failing to implement the resolution of 1995 which called for the establishment of a nuclear weapons free-zone in the Middle East would perpetuate instability and tension in the region and would add to the complexities related to the universal adherence to the Treaty.
Security and stability in the Middle East region requires the elimination of all Weapons of Mass Destruction and especially nuclear weapons pursuant to paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687 (1991), and relevant General Assembly resolutions that are adopted annually by consensus, in addition to the resolution of the fifth Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1995.
Mr. President,
Nuclear terrorism represents one of the most dangerous threats to international security, and tight security measures are the necessary means for preventing terrorists from acquiring nuclear material, as there are terrorist groups with the intention and ability to cause massive destruction if technical resources are accessible to them in the black market.
Mr. President,
Before concluding, I must emphasize that the NPT guarantees the right to all member States to conduct research and produce nuclear energy and its investment for development and cooperation in the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. However, in addressing the dual-use nature of nuclear energy permanent arrangements should be adopted to reconcile the right for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the need for non-proliferation. Transparency and cooperation with the IAEA, the application of the safeguards system, and other relevant measures must be emphasized in addition to respect of international conventions. Possibly one of the international initiatives to provide low- enriched uranium is the initiative proposed by the IAEA given that there are assurances for member-states to retain the right to peaceful use of nuclear energy, to obtain advanced technology, to uranium enrichment, and to obtain enriched uranium without discrimination, with fair prices and in line with their efforts to achieve development for their people.
Thank you Mr. President.










 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 368

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 369

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3





Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



