Mr. President,
I wish first of all to join all those who spoke before me in expressing my warmest congratulations on your appointment as President of this Conference. Please rest assured that you will receive full cooperation and support from the Italian Delegation. Let me also add that Italy fully shares the statement made by the High Representative, on behalf of the European Union. We strongly support the Decision adopted by the Council of the European Union on 29 March 2010, which defines the position of the European Union at this Review Conference. We are convinced that this EU Decision could serve as a useful term of reference for our debate.
Since Italy's position is reflected in the EU statement, I shall limit my remarks to the main objectives to be pursued by this Conference which - as we all agree - should review the operation of the NPT with a view to assuring that the purposes of the Preamble and the provisions of the Treaty are being implemented and, in our opinion, should propose measures to strengthen the Treaty and the disarmament and non proliferation regime.
Mr. President,
the situation today is different from the one five years ago, when we had a stalemate at the 2005 Review Conference. Nuclear disarmament and non proliferation are high on the international agenda. We do hope that this renewed political attention, thanks inter alia to the personal commitment of the President of the United States of America, will create the right humus for the success of this conference. Italy, as President of the G-8 last year, has consistently promoted these issues in all international fora. I would like in this context to recall the L'Aquila Statement on Non Proliferation, adopted by the G-8 leaders at last year's Summit, which highlighted the commitment to create the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons.
Mr. President,
Italy recognizes the importance of the NPT as the cornerstone of the international non proliferation and disarmament regime. In order to achieve success during this Review Conference, we ought to set realistic goals of equal priority in all the three pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
On disarmament, we welcome the recent signature by the President of the United States of America and the President of the Russian Federation - two countries that between them hold more than 90% of the world's nuclear arsenals - of a new Treaty for the reduction of Strategic Nuclear Weapons. The signing of this new Treaty is the best way to display the seriousness of the U.S. and Russian commitment to nuclear disarmament, We encourage all States to implement actions, particularly in the framework of their security policies and strategies, consistent with the goal of creating the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons.
Non Proliferation remains the "core business" of the NPT. The fact that there have been efforts to carry out clandestine programmes and networks is an unacceptable threat to the Treaty's operation. The lack of universality of the Treaty is a further weakness.
Furthermore, specifically on compliance, upholding the NPT is our ultimate aim, bearing in mind the current major proliferation challenges, particularly those coming from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and from the Iranian nuclear programme.
The possible misuse of nuclear weapons or materials by non-State Actors is a serious additional threat. Thus, nuclear security has become over the years an important part of the broader issue of non proliferation. We therefore commend the President of the United States for launching and hosting the first global Summit on Nuclear Security. The Summit has been a real success. For the first time many countries, from different regions and with different positions, have gathered to discuss and agree upon a common understanding of the challenges and principles of nuclear security as well as devise a joint course of action and concrete measures in this regard.
As far as the third pillar of the Treaty is concerned, Italy strongly reaffirms its commitment to the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and in conformity with Articles I and II of the Treaty. We are currently experiencing a nuclear renaissance: many countries are planning or developing civil nuclear programmes. Today, nuclear energy is of paramount importance, as we are globally engaged in finding new methods power generation while at the same time reducing carbon emissions. Of course, those countries engaged or interested in developing nuclear programmes for peaceful purposes must do so in full compliance with their non proliferation obligations under the Treaty. In this respect, the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency is key, Compliance and effective verification will not hinder the use of nuclear energy, but rather facilitate its safe and secure development and deployment as an energy source.
Mr. President,
strengthening the international disarmament and non proliferation regime requires, in Italy's view, additional - but very important - steps.
The first is the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. This Treaty has not yet entered into force due to the so far insufficient number of ratifications. Italy has ratified the CTBT and desires to see, as soon as possible, its formal entry into force. Once again, we urge those States that have not yet signed the CTBT or that have not yet ratified it, to reassess their position.
The second is an effectively verifiable Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty. By stopping, under appropriate safeguards, all production of weapons-grade fissile materials and encouraging the conversion of their manufacturing plants to civil use, a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty would drain away the supply of the main components of nuclear warheads. Moreover, such a Treaty would make nuclear disarmament irreversible. We hope that in the Conference 011 Disarmament the current deadlock may be broken and negotiations on such a Treaty can start as soon as possible.
Furthermore, IAEA safeguards must be strengthened. This is why we call on all countries that have not yet done so to promptly adopt the IAEA Additional Protocol. The multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, and the work that the IAEA is carrying out in this field, are an important tool to address the expanded need for nuclear fuel services, while taking into account the global interest in minimizing the risk of proliferation.
Mr. President,
I would like to briefly touch upon three additional issues, which are very relevant to the work that the Conference, under your guidance, is going to undertake. On the Middle East, and in particular on mechanisms to take forward the objectives of the 1995 Resolution on a Zone Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction, new ideas and initiatives will be needed during this Conference. Italy is ready to do its part in this effort.
Then, there is the issue of withdrawal from NPT. We share the concern of many countries on this important problem. The NPT should not be open to abuse. We cannot allow countries to withdraw from the Treaty in order to escape without consequences from their obligations. At the same time, while recognizing the right to withdraw from it in accordance with Article X, we favour the establishment of specific mechanisms which should involve the UN Security Council and the IAEA for ensuring the maintaining and fulfillment of safeguards obligations. The EU has circulated specific ideas in this respect, to which Italy fully subscribes,
Finally, and related to the question of withdrawal, Italy believes that the NPT requires more generally a review of its operations and procedures to enhance its effectiveness, to allow swifter response to developing events and to provide the means for its signatories to more easily manifest the political will necessary to achieve progress. To this end, we were happy to co-sponsor Working Paper 4, drafted under a Canadian initiative, that addresses these points.Mr. President,
I am confident that under your chairmanship, we will be able to deliver the results that the world is expecting from this Conference. Italy stands ready to assist you in this endeavour.
Thank you, Mi*. President.










 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 8

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 9





Mr. President,

Mr. President,

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 5

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



