1
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES
TO THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
STATEMENT BY
H.E. SENATOR BENEDETTO DELLA VEDOVA
DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
(NEW YORK, APRIL 27, 2015)
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
2
::t ; ITALY 2017- 2018
Candidate to the United Nations Sem ity Council 
3
Madam President,
Let me first of all join previous speakers in expressing Italy’s deep condolences
to the Government and People of Nepal for the immense tragedy that took the lives of
so many people.
Madam President,
Allow me also to offer my sincere congratulations on your election as President
of this Review Conference. Please, rest assured of my delegation’s full support and
cooperation throughout the next four weeks.
Let me also recall that Italy fully endorses the statement that will be delivered
by the High Representative on behalf of the EU. Furthermore, I wish to draw your
attention to the G7 declaration on disarmament and non-proliferation recently issued
at the Lűbeck Foreign Ministers’ Meeting. Having said that, I shall limit myself to
additional remarks.
Madam President,
Italy is committed to achieve a successful outcome of this Conference based on
consensus. The 2010 Action Plan remains, in our view, a valid benchmark upon
which we should build our future deliberations.
Since the last Review Conference, the Italian contribution to the goal of a safer
world for all without nuclear weapons, in accordance with Article VI of the NPT, has
taken different forms.
First, on the so called humanitarian campaign, Italy shares the utmost concern
about the catastrophic consequences associated with nuclear weapons use. Therefore,
we believe that an effective, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament has to 
4
be pursued through a step by step approach. In this vein, Italy is contributing
constructively to the current debate by organizing a workshop to examine this topic
under the lens of the international law. The workshop, entitled “Nuclear Weapons
and Human Security”, will be held at the International Institute of Humanitarian Law,
in Sanremo, on 18th of June.
Second, Italy has been member of the Group of Governmental Experts on a
Treaty Banning the production of fissile material. We welcome its final report,
proving, once again, that this subject is ripe for a prompt start of negotiations at the
Conference of Disarmament.
Moreover, Italy strongly supports the launch of the International Partnership
for Nuclear Disarmament Verification, as an innovative initiative involving both
Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Weapon States, and intends to be fully engaged in it by
making available all its relevant expertise.
We are indeed convinced that verification and safeguards are crucial crosscutting
elements for an effective implementation of the Treaty. For this reason, Italy
eagerly contributes to CTBT’s International Monitoring System and fully supports
the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system, including by developing the Statelevel
Concept.
Madam President,
Italy welcomes the agreement on the key elements of a Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action that has been reached between the P5+1 and Iran in Lausanne.
Looking forward to its finalization, we consider crucial the IAEA’s role, both in
monitoring the implementation of a comprehensive final agreement and in dealing
with the Possible Military Dimensions (PMDs) of the Iranian nuclear program. We
value the importance of nuclear-weapons-free zones for peace and security. In this
regard, we are committed to the process towards a conference on the establishment of
the Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone in the Middle East. Convinced that the 
5
Conference on the Free Zone should stay among our main common objectives, we
believe that the primary responsibility rests with the countries in the region.
We are equally committed to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
We supported the adoption of both a renewed EU Directive, in 2014, and the
Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety, last February. I am also glad to announce that,
last week, the Italian Parliament has authorized the ratification of the 2005
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
Furthermore, as a follow-up to our participation in the Nuclear Security
Summit process, we are organizing a high-level event dedicated to “The Nuclear
Security Summit 2016 and Beyond: the Role of Training and Support Centres, and
Centres of Excellence”, to be held in Bologna on 7-8 May 2015.
Over the last few years, we have increased our attention to education, training,
as well as academics and scientists’ contribution to the objectives of the Treaty. In
2010, in cooperation with the IAEA, we launched the International School on
Nuclear Security in Trieste, which provides professionals with knowledge of the
international legal framework on nuclear security and raises awareness on illicit
trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive material. Moreover, last March, we
devoted the annual Amaldi Conference to “The International Cooperation for
Enhancing Nuclear Safety, Security, Safeguards and Non-proliferation”, where
scientists and experts had the opportunity to present a wide-range of approaches to
this subject.
In addition, we remain committed to our national programmes for the
decommissioning of nuclear plants and the management of radioactive waste. Italy
and the United States of America have jointly completed the removal of a significant
amount of excess highly enriched uranium and separated plutonium from Italy and
plan to uphold this endeavor. 
6
To conclude, I am pleased to mention some successful examples of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in my country. I am referring, firstly, to the TAPIRO fast
neutron source research reactor, which plays a strategic role in different fields, such
as basic nuclear physics, fission, fusion and aerospace programs. Secondly, to the
contribution in terms of expert training courses and experimental activities provided
by ENEA, through its Marine Environment Laboratory in Santa Teresa, to the IAEA
“Ocean Acidification International Coordination Centre”. Finally, to the synchrotron
accelerator at National Center for Oncological Hadrontherapy, in Pavia, used to
produce proton and carbon ion beams for the precise and specific treatment for
different kinds of tumors resistant to conventional radiotherapy or requiring a
selective release of energy.
Madame President,
I am confident that, under your guide, we will be able to deliver the results that
everybody is expecting from this conference.
I thank you.