2017 NPT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL DEBATE
STATEMENT BY
H.E. AMBASSADOR VINICIO MAT!
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
(VIENNA, 3 MAY 2017)
Check against delivery
Mr. Chair,
Let me first of all congratulate you on your appointment as Chair of this First Meeting of the
Preparatory Committee of the 2020 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference. I would
like to assure you of my Delegation’s full SUpport and cooperation.
Let me also express our utmost appreciation for the inclusive and transparent manner in
which you have conducted the preparatory process for this meeting.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union. I would like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. Chair,
Italy attaches great importance to disarmament in its broadest sense and it is fully committed
to disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation as essential components of its foreign policy.
Within this general framework, Italy reiterates the centrality of the Treaty on the Non
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a multilateral instrument of the utmost importance for
maintaining and reinforcing international peace, security and stability.
We are convinced that the NPT remains the cornerstone of the global nuclear non
proliferation regime, the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and an
important element in the further development of nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes.
The three NPT pillars continue to be mutually reinforcing and Italy still believes that the
2010 Review Conference Action Plan remains a very good basis to progress in all of them.
We call upon States that have not yet done so to join the NPT as non-nuclear weapon States,
without delay and without conditions. We also call on all State Parties to the Treaty to implement
all its provisions as well as commitments agreed by subsequent Review Conferences, without delay
and in a balanced manner.
Mr. Chair,
Italy continues to support the goal of a peaceful and secure world free of nuclear weapons.
Through its Article VI, the NPT provides the only realistic legal framework to pursue this objective,
in a way that promotes international stability and undiminished security for all.
Italy is convinced that the goal of “global zero” and an effective, verifiable, and irreversible
nuclear disarmament can be attained only through an inclusive and progressive approach, based on
concrete and effective measures.
Among those measures, we would like to highlight that the prompt entry into furce of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty” is crucial. Italy calls upon all States that have not yet
done so and, in particular, the remaining eight Annex-2 States, to sign and ratify the Treaty without
further delay. In the meantime. the resolve of all rele ant States to abide by their respective
moratoriums on nuclear tests continues to be essential.
Another key priority for Italy remains the immediate commencement within the CD of
negotiations of a Treaty dealing with fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. In this regard, we welcome the establishment of the High Level Expert Preparatory Group
pursuant to UNGA Resolution 7 1/259. Pending the entry into force of such a Treaty, we believe
that all relevant States should abide by a moratorium on the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons. We also welcome U1GA Resolution n. 7 1/67 on the role of verification in
advancing nuclear disarmament.
The nuclear weapon States bear fundamental responsibilities for the implementation of Art.
VI of the NPT. We welcome the reductions made from the entry into force of the Treaty by most of
the nuclear weapons States and the continued implementation of the New Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty (New START) by the U.S. and Russia. We strongly encourage them to seek further
reductions in their nuclear arsenals including strategic, non-strategic. deployed and non-deployed
weapons. In this context, we underline the importance of preserving the viability of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (1NF), a landmark arms-control agreement that remains
key to European and international security and stability. ***********
Mr. Chair,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons continues to represent a major threat to international
security.
Italy condemns in the strongest terms the DPRK’s ballistic missile and nuclear tests, which
clearly violate its international obligations and represent an increasing threat to regional and
international security, peace and the global non-proliferation regime. In our current capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Resolution 1718 Committee, Italy is supporting effhrts worldwide to
properly implement the set of restrictive measures adopted by the Security Council. We urgently
call on the DPRK to abandon all its existing nuclear and ballistic missile programmes in a
complete, verifiable, and irreversible manner, and to return to the NPT and IAEA Safeguards,
The IAEA’s system of safeguards is a fundamental component of the nuclear non
proliferation regime and plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. Italy
supports the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system, including universal adherence to
comprehensive agreements and additional protocols.
We welcome the work done by the Agency to monitor the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action between the E3/EU+3 and Iran. We believe that the full implementation of the JCPoA and
of UN Security Council Resolution 223 1 can foster international and regional security and
encourage mutual trust between the parties involved. Full implementation of the JCPoA strongly
underpins the overall non-proliferation architecture. With this in mind, we have undertaken the role
of Facilitator for the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2231, being committed to
helping smooth and productive communication among the major stakeholders. We support efforts
by all Parties to ensure that the JCPoA continues to provide benefits fbr all and remains a success
story in line with the the clear progress achieved so far more than one year since the implementation
day.
Italy highly values the importance of nuclear-weapon-free zones for peace and security, in
accordance with the 1999 UN Disarmament Commission guidelines, and calls on nuclear-weapon
States to sign and ratify the relevant protocols of the Treaties establishing such zones.
We reiterate our support to the convening of a Conference on the establishment of a Middle
East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and all other Weapons of Mass Destruction - to be attended by
all States of the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by them - as decided by the
2010 Review Conference.
Mr. Chair,
Before closing, allow me to mention that, even though Italy decided at the end of the 80s to
phase out of nuclear energy for power production, we can count on a record of successful examples
of peaceful applications of nuclear technology in several fields and on several centers of excellency
for research purposes.
This has allowed us to actively cooperate on the international stage for the further
development of nuclear applications for peaceful uses. Increasingly over the last few years, we have
paid special attention to education and training in this field (Italy hosts in Trieste the International
Center for Theoretical Physics and is among its main contributors). Moreover, we strongly support
the IAEA technical cooperation program, in increasing the capacities of State parties wishing to
develop peaceful nuclear technologies.
At the same time, we believe that the peaceful development of nuclear energy requires the
implementation of safeguards as well as appropriate and effective levels of safety and security. We
are supportive of all international initiatives, both at a global and regional level, aiming at
enhancing the safety and security of nuclear materials, facilities, and installations,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
4