Mr. President,
On behalf of the Japanese government and people, I would like to express my heartfelt congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of this Conference.
The NPT is currently facing serious challenges. The proliferation of WMD and their delivery means is one of the most serious security issues. We should make this Conference an opportunity to reinforce the authority and credibility of the NPT.
I have visited Hiroshima and Nagasaki many times and witnessed the tragic effects of atomic bombings. Today, as I entered this hall, I was struck anew by the exhibits of the nuclear devastation. At the 60th anniversary of the atomic bombings, I hope that we will reconfirm our commitment to the NPT so that such a tragedy will never be repeated.
(UN Reform) Mr. President,
In his Report, Secretary-General Kofi Annan underlined the increasing relevance of disarmament and non-proliferation to international peace and security. I believe that the United Nations should play an essential role in tackling this issue. For this purpose also, reform of the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, is indispensable. To date, Japan has been at the forefront in promoting disarmament and non-proliferation. Japan is resolved to play an ever more active role in a functionally reinforced United
Nations to promote these causes and will continue to uphold its "Three Non-Nuclear Principles".
(Japan's priority issues) Mr. President,
I would like to stress the following five points in order to strengthen the functioning of the NPT.
First, it is of paramount importance to correctly deal with regional issues.
In particular, the DPRK's nuclear programs pose a serious challenge to the international nuclear non-proliferation regime as well as a direct threat to the peace and stability of Northeast Asia, including Japan. The declaration by the DPRK in February this year that it had manufactured and possesses nuclear' weapons has generated deep concern in the international community. Japan urges the DPRK to comply with its obligations under the NPT, and to completely dismantle all of its nuclear programs, including its uranium enrichment programs, subject to credible international verification. Japan also urges the DPRK to expeditiously return to the Six-Party Talks without preconditions. Japan hopes that this Conference will deliver these clear messages to the DPRK.
As for the Iranian nuclear issue, Japan considers it important that Iran sincerely implement all the requirements of the relevant IAEA resolutions. Japan urges Iran to reach an agreement with France, Germany and the United Kingdom on the "objective guarantees" that Iran's nuclear program is exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Japan calls upon India, Pakistan and Israel to accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without conditions. Japan welcomes Libya's decision to abandon its WMD programs. Japan also supports the establishment of a WMD-free zone in the Middle East.
Second, in order to realize a peaceful and safe world free of nuclear weapons, practical nuclear disarmament measures must be implemented incrementally. From this viewpoint, Japan urges those countries whose ratification is required for the CTBT to enter into force to ratify it at the earliest date. Japan also urges an early commencement of negotiations on the FMCT.
While the efforts of nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals should be duly appreciated, Japan calls upon all the nuclear-weapon States to take further steps towards nuclear disarmament, including deeper reductions of all types of nuclear weapons.
In this respect, we should recall that the "Principles and Objectives" was agreed upon in 1995, and the 13 practical steps in the 2000 Review Conference.
Third, Japan strongly believes that the universalization of the IAEA Additional Protocol is the most realistic and effective means to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime, and has been actively promoting this goal. Japan calls on all States that have not yet concluded it to do so without further delay.
Fourth, it is of great value to reinforce the non-proliferation regime as a whole with proactive cooperation of as many states as possible. Japan actively participates in the PSI and calls upon all states to sincerely implement UN Security Council resolution 1540.
Lastly, while the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is increasingly important, it must be carried out with the confidence of the international community. Such confidence should be based upon the faithful fulfillment of NPT obligations and high transparency of nuclear activities. Japan continues to support IAEA's technical cooperation activities based on these considerations.
(Conclusion) Mr. President,
Japan submits a document entitled 'Twenty-one Measures for the 21SI Century' containing the gist of concrete messages that we sincerely hope the Conference will deliver. Japan believes that these measures will contribute to reinforcing the functioning of the NPT regime. I strongly hope that the Conference will issue robust and clear messages enabling the NPT regime to be further consolidated.
Thank you for your attention.
(End)
Working Paper of Japan Further Measures to be taken for strengthening the NPT ("21 Measures for the 21st Century)
The 2005 NPT Review Conference will provide the States Parties with opportunities to show their resolve to make progress in strengthening the NPT regime, which will certainly contribute to the international peace and stability.
Japan believes that the States Parties should redouble their efforts to reach a common understanding on measures to be taken for further strengthening the NPT at the coming NPT Review Conference.
To this end, Japan proposes the following 21 measures to be included in the document(s) to be issued as final product(s) of the 2005 NPT Review Conference;
{Nuclear disarmament
In accordance with Article VI of the Treaty and pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives" and the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference, the Conference agrees that all States Parties should take further practical measures towards the goal of nuclear disarmament.
Further reduction in nuclear arsenals
The Conference agrees that the realization of a safe world free of nuclear weapons will require further steps, including deeper reductions in all types of nuclear weapons by all the nuclear-weapon States with greater transparency and in an irreversible manner, in the process of working towards their elimination.
While recognizing the progress made by nuclear-weapon States on nuclear arms reductions, the Conference encourages the Russian Federation and the United States of America to implement fully the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions and to continue their intensive consultations in accordance with the Joint Declaration on the New Strategic Relationship between the two States.
International cooperation on reducing nuclear-weapons-related materials
With a view to accelerating disarmament of nuclear weapons excess to military needs, the Conference encourages States to continue to pursue efforts within the framework of international cooperation aimed at the reduction of nuclear-weapons-related materials, such as the Co-operative Threat Reduction program, and the G8 Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction.
Reducing the operational status of nuclear weapons systems
The Conference calls for the nuclear-weapon States to further reduce the operational status of nuclear weapons systems in ways that promote international stability and security.
A diminishing role for nuclear weapons
The Conference reaffirms the necessity of a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination.
Securing fissile materials
The Conference stresses that fissile material resulting from reductions in nuclear arsenals must be controlled and protected to the highest standards, and calls for arrangements by all the nuclear-weapon States to place fissile material no longer required for military purposes under international verification as soon as is practicable to ensure Such material is irreversibly removed from nuclear weapons use.
Early entry into force of the CTBT
The Conference reaffirms the importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications, without delay and without conditions and in accordance with constitutional processes, to achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The Conference urges all States that have not yet ratified the CTBT, in particular those eleven States whose ratification is required for the Treaty to enter into force, to do so at the earliest opportunity.
The Conference agrees that existing moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test explosions must be maintained pending entry into force of the CTBT.
CTBT verification regimes
The Conference reaffirms the importance of continued development of the CTBT verification regime, including the International Monitoring System, which will be required to provide assurance of compliance with the Treaty.
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty
The Conference reaffirms the importance of immediate commencement of negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, and its early conclusion.
The Conference stresses that a conclusion of the FMCT will be an essential building block towards the total elimination of nuclear arsenals and will also contribute to the prevention of nuclear proliferation by banning globally the
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and enhancing transparency and accountability in the management of such materials through its verification system.
The Conference calls upon all nuclear-weapon States and the non-NPT states to declare moratoriums on the production of fissile material for any nuclear weapons pending the entry into force of the FMCT.
Given the importance of immediate commencement of negotiation of the FMCT, the Conference regards it as a primary task for the Conference on Disarmament to reach agreement on a programme of work.
[Nuclear Non-proliferation^
DPRK
The Conference expresses grave concern over the DPRK's nuclear programs, which undermine peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula and beyond.
The Conference also expresses deep concern regarding the DPRK's decision to withdraw from the Treaty, which continues to represent a serious challenge to the global non-proliferation regime.
Furthermore, the Conference expresses its utmost regret and deep concern over the DPRK Foreign Ministry Statement on February 10, 2005, which announced that it would suspend its participation in the Six-Party Talks for an indefinite period and that it had manufactured nuclear weapons.
The Conference urges the DPRK to promptly come into compliance with the NPT and completely dismantle all of its nuclear programs, including its uranium enrichment programs, in a permanent, thorough and transparent manner subject to credible international verification. The Conference stresses that the Korean Peninsula must be denuclearized, while the peace, security and stability of the region should be strengthened and the legitimate interests and concerns of the relevant parties should be satisfied.
The Conference emphasizes the importance of peacefully resolving this issue through diplomatic means within the framework of the Six-Party Talks and urges the DPRK to expeditiously return to the Six-Party Talks without preconditions.
Iran
Recognizing the efforts made by the international community, especially EU3(France, Germany, United Kingdom)/EU and Iran, to pursue the peaceful resolution of Iranian nuclear issue, the Conference recognizes the importance of the fact that Iran has voluntarily continued and extended its suspension of all uranium enrichment-related and reprocessing activities. At the same time, the Conference reaffirms its strong concern that Iran's policy of concealment up to October 2003 has resulted in many breaches of Iran's obligations to comply with its safeguards agreement with the IAEA. The Conference further calls on Iran to sincerely implement all the requirements of the relevant IAEA resolutions and expects the current negotiation process between EU3/EU and Iran to result in a success. In particular, the Conference considers it extremely important that Iran, through its negotiations with the EU3/EU, agree to provide sufficient "objective guarantees" that its nuclear program is exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Libya
The Conference welcomes Libya's decision announced in December 2003 to abandon all of its weapons of mass destruction programs, while expressing concern over Libya's past failures to meet the requirements of its safeguards agreement, which constituted non-compliance. The Conference strongly hopes that the DPRK and those states that are subject to suspicion for developing WMDs will follow Libya's example.
Strengthening and maximizing the efficiency of the IAEA Safeguards
The Conference reaffirms the necessity of enhancing the IAEA's capability of safeguards activities to assure the non-diversion of declared nuclear material which has been placed under safeguards in each State and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities for the State as a whole, and emphasize, in particular, the importance of the universalization of the Additional Protocol as the most realistic and effective means to strengthen the current international non-proliferation regime. The Conference recognizes that the strengthened safeguards system should constitute the NPT safeguards standard as required by paragraph 1 of Article III of the NPT from a certain date. The Conference urges those States Parties that have not yet concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement and/or an additional protocol with the IAEA to do so without further delay.
The Conference welcomes the IAEA's completion of the conceptual framework for integrated safeguards as well as its application to those States Parties that have achieved a good track record on the IAEA safeguards activities based on both comprehensive safeguards agreements and additional protocols. The Conference recognizes the importance of promoting the adoption of integrated safeguards with a view to maximizing the effectiveness and the efficiency of the IAEA's safeguards activities within available resources, and encourages the IAEA to take necessary steps to strengthen integrated safeguards approaches.
Establishing and implementing effective national export control systems
Recognizing the important role of multinational export control regimes for
nuclear related materials, equipment and technology, i.e., the Zangger Committee
and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) in ensuring the implementation of paragraph 2 of the Article III of the Treaty, the Conference urges those States Parties that have not yet done so to establish and implement appropriate effective national rules and regulations on export controls over both nuclear and nuclear-related dual-use items, based on the Zangger Committee Understandings (INFCIRC/209/Rev.2) and the NSG Guidelines (INFCIRC/254/Rev.7/Partl and INFCIRC/254/Rev.6/Part 2). In this regard, the Conference notes that the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 adopted in April 2004 requires all States to establish, develop, review and maintain appropriate effective national export controls.
Special controls on the transfer of sensitive material, facilities, equipment and
technology
In particular, the Conference recognizes the necessity of introducing new measures to place special controls on the transfer of sensitive material, facilities, equipment and technology that could be used in the development of nuclear weapons, such as those related to enrichment and reprocessing, and urges all States Parties to exercise restraint in and vigilance over such transfer. In this regard, the Conference welcomes the continuing, devoted efforts to update the NSG Guidelines by the NSG participating governments.
IAEA Additional Protocol as a precondition of supply'
With regard to the required safeguards in paragraph 2 of Article III of the Treaty, the Conference reaffirms paragraph 12 of Decision 2 (Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament), adopted on 11 May 1995 by the Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty, in which States Parties agreed that new nuclear supply arrangements to non-nuclear-weapon States should require, as a necessary precondition, acceptance of IAEA's full-scope safeguards. The Conference further agrees that new nuclear supply arrangements of all the items in the Trigger List of the Zangger Committee Understandings and of the NSG Part 1 Guidelines to non-nuclear-weapon States should require, as a necessary precondition, the conclusion of additional protocols. In this regard, the Conference welcomes the continuing, devoted efforts to update the Zangger Committee Understandings and the NSG Guidelines by participating governments of the respective multinational export control regimes.
Nuclear- weapon- free zone
The Conference agrees that the concept of internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones established on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States in the regions concerned contributes to enhancing regional and
global peace and stability, and thus reaffirms its support for the concept.
The Conference appreciates the efforts made to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions, in particular in the Central Asia and the Middle East, and agrees that progress in this regard will further strengthen the credibility of the NPT.
Measures against nuclear terrorism
The Conference urges the States Parties to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) to participate in the Conference of Plenipotentiaries in July 2005 and to agree on amendments to strengthen the CPPNM.
The Conference welcomes the approval by the IAEA Board of Governors of the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, and the approval by the IAEA Board of Governors of the Guidance on the Import and Export of Radioactive Sources.
The Conference welcomes the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism by the UN General Assembly.
The Conference notes that United Nations Security Council resolution 1540 requires all States to develop and maintain appropriate physical protection measures, border control and law enforcement.
Use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes|
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy
The Conference affirms that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by a non-nuclear-weapon State that carries out nuclear activities with the confidence of the international community by faithfully fulfilling its NPT obligations and by ensuring high transparency of its nuclear activities should not be unduly affected.
The Conference supports the promotion of the activities of the IAEA in the field of nuclear safety, and also supports adherence by as many States as possible to international conventions in this area, such as the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
The Conference supports enhancing the global safety of spent fuel and radioactive waste management and thereby recognizes the importance of adherence by as many States as possible to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.
The Conference recognizes the importance of international technical cooperation in peaceful use of nuclear technology, particularly in such fields as human health, agriculture, food, sanitary, and water resources, that plays a key role and brings about significant benefits to the whole world. In this regard, the Conference stresses the need to further strengthen the IAEA's technical co-operation activities, to continually enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the technical cooperation programmes, and to promote activities supporting self-reliance and sustainability, particularly in developing countries in the fields stated.
The Conference urges IAEA Member States to make every effort to contribute to the Agency's Technical Cooperation Fund as well as to honor their obligation to pay their National Participation Costs as well as arrears of Assessed Programme Costs. In this context, the Conference stresses that the financing of technical cooperation should be in line with the concept of "shared responsibility" and all members share a common responsibility towards financing and enhancing the technical cooperation activities of the Agency.
|General Issues |
Universalization of the NPT
The Conference urges all States not yet party to the Treaty, namely India, Israel and Pakistan, to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without condition, and to bring into force the required comprehensive safeguards agreements and additional protocols. The Conference strongly urges the Non-Party States to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and purpose of the Treaty as well as to take practical steps in support of the Treaty, pending their accession to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States.
Effective mechanisms to deal with withdrawal from the NPT
The Conference reaffirms that a State Party which has withdrawn from the Treaty remains responsible for violations it committed while being a party. The Conference urges any supplier country of the nuclear material, facilities, equipment etc. to make necessary arrangements entitling it to require the return of any nuclear material, facilities, equipment etc. transferred prior to the withdrawal or their neutralization.
Disarmament and Non-proliferation Education
The Conference encourages the States Parties to undertake concrete activities to implement, as appropriate, the recommendations in the report of the United Nations Secretary-General on disarmament and non-proliferation education, submitted by the Secretary General to the General Assembly at its 57th session and to voluntarily share information on efforts they have been undertaking to this end.
(End)