Mr. President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. Libran Cabactulan, on your election to the post of President of the NPT 2010 Review Conference, as well as the members of the Bureau. I wish the Conference a very successful achievement of its objectives.
Mr. President,
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the cornerstone of international security, and this is undisputed as the contemporary world recognizes fully that there is no greater threat than the existence and proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Recently, we have been pleased to note the "Renaissance in the nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament process." The US nuclear posture has been reviewed and the landmark new START Treaty signed between Russia and the United States. Prominent world politicians are engaged in advancing initiatives aimed at freeing the world from nuclear threat. We also welcome the outcomes of the Global Nuclear Security Summit and share the vision of the urgent need for states to strengthen control over nuclear activities on their territories and prevent terrorist acts related to nuclear weapons and materials.
Mr. President,
During his historic visit to the former nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk and the "ground zero" in April 2010, the United Nations Secretary-General commended the outstanding and visionary decision of President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan to shut down this test site as a powerful symbol of hope for a world free of nuclear weapons. By this historical act, he called on the leaders of all countries, including the nuclear powers, to follow Kazakhstan's example, denounce nuclear weapons and ensure a non-nuclear future for humankind.
Kazakhstan stands for undertaking urgent measures on ensuring the effectiveness and universality of the NPT. Despite some positive steps, the international community has not, regrettably, been able to advance the main goals of disarmament within the NPT framework, prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and emergence of the "new" nuclear-weapon countries. It is absolutely essential to achieve unconditional compliance of States Parties with their obligations, embodied in the unity of the three basic NPT pillars - disarmament, non- proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We believe that the nuclear-weapon states should undertake efforts for the implementation of Article VI of the NPT in reducing their nuclear arsenals. We highly value the step taken by Russia and the US by signing the new START Treaty. We now expect reciprocal measures from other nuclear weapons possessors.
We support the idea of the conclusion of an international legally binding instrument on security assurances to the non-nuclear-weapon states by the nuclear- weapon states. We call on states that possess nuclear weapons and politico-military alliances to revise their military doctrines in order to exclude all possible use of nuclear weapons. Only by this means would we be able to overcome the existing belief that nuclear weapons can provide security, and derived from this delusion, the aspiration to acquire them.
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is the important component of the international security architecture. We have repeatedly called on the states for its earliest entry into force. We are confident that the ratification of CTBT by the United States will serve as a guiding example for other states and thus facilitate the Treaty's entry into force. We are also encouraged by the announcement of Indonesia that it will soon ratify the Treaty.
As you are aware, the UN General Assembly unanimously adopted last December a resolution which declares 29 August - the day when one of the world's largest nuclear test sites at Semipalatinsk was officially shut down - as the International Day against Nuclear Tests; and hence this resolution directly furthers the objectives of the NPT. We are certain that the Conference participants will take practical steps for the implementation of the resolution's provisions.
In the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, we support the legal and inalienable right of every State Party to the NPT to develop the use of peaceful nuclear energy in accordance with IAEA requirements. It, therefore, means that there should be no monopolistic approaches and double standards. We call upon all States Parties that have not yet concluded IAEA's comprehensive safeguard agreements and additional protocols to do so as soon as possible. It is also necessary to strengthen the functions and role of the Agency in the inspection and verification of the transfer and use of fissile materials.
Kazakhstan, being the major uranium producer and having the experience and capacity of refining highly enriched uranium into its low enriched form, intends to make its own contribution to the development of peaceful atomic energy. It is precisely for this reason that we presented to the IAEA the proposal to host on our territory an international nuclear fuel bank. This initiative is a concrete offer of Kazakhstan towards the elimination of the "blind spots" that exist in the international legal arena with regard to the development of national peaceful nuclear programs by a number of states.
We believe that nuclear-weapon-free zones promote the strengthening of collective security. Last year, the Central Asian region became a nuclear-weapon-free zone, making it the first such zone in the northern hemisphere, bordering two nuclear-weapon states. We expect to receive "negative security assurances" which would clearly demonstrate the genuine interests of the "P5" in achieving a nuclear-free world. In this regard, we welcome the readiness of the US to consult with the parties to the Central Asian nuclear-weapons-free zone treaty to resolve the issue of signing the Additional protocol.
Kazakhstan welcomes the entry into force of the Treaty of African nuclear-weapon- free zone. We also call on the establishment of such a zone in the region of the Middle East.
We envision a world, becoming a one single zone, free of nuclear weapons, and believe that the time has come to start discussing the issue of adopting, in the future, a Universal Declaration of a Nuclear Weapons Free World.
We call upon all states for the earliest commencement of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT). Kazakhstan believes that the development and conclusion of the FMCT is a significant step toward nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
This year is significant and crucial for the entire disarmament process, and we sincerely hope for positive outcomes of the Conference. Once again, Kazakhstan assures the world that it stands together with those who share the vision of a nuclear-free world.
Thank you for your attention.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



