 Please, check against delivery
STATEMENT
by
Mr. Barlybay Sadykov
Ambassador-at-Large
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the general debate of the Third Preparatory Committee for the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
29 April 2014
New York 
Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished delegates,
First of all, allow me, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the Third session of
the Preparatory Committee of the NPT Review Conference in 2015. I believe, your
professional experience and knowledge will advance our work within the final
session of the Preparatory Committee before the Review Conference in 2015.
Let me assure you that the delegation of Kazakhstan is ready to cooperate
with you and work closely with other delegations to achieve our common goals
and objectives.

Mr. Chairman,
The Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has been and
remains the cornerstone of international security.
At the same time, its potential has yet to be fully realized. Within the
framework of the NPT, the main objectives of the Treaty, which are the actual
reduction and destruction of nuclear weapons, prevention of "new" nuclear states
emerging, and effective cooperation in the peaceful use of atomic energy - have
not been achieved.
We consider it vital to reach unconditional fulfillment by all the Treaty
Parties of all their obligations embodied in the unity of the three fundamental
components: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Unfortunately, a balanced approach to these components of the NPT has not
been accomplished for the moment. Despite the claims of commitment to nuclear
disarmament, the world still keeps a huge number of nuclear weapons that are
enough to destroy life on Earth several times. At the same time, there are still
barriers in obtaining advanced technologies in the field of nuclear energy.

Mr. Chairman,
Four states, possessing nuclear weapons in the past, had demonstrated a real
commitment to nuclear disarmament and renounced it. Kazakhstan, Belarus,
Ukraine and South Africa did not wait for the conditions for nuclear disarmament –
which is what the states possessing such weapons insist on nowadays and we call
upon all nuclear possessing states to take concrete and comprehensive actions to
build a world without nuclear weapons.
We are convinced that only quick and full nuclear disarmament is a
guarantee of non-proliferation and global security.
We believe that the adoption of a UN Universal Declaration on the
achievement of a nuclear weapons free world will promote the advancement of the
Convention on Full and Total Ban of Nuclear Weapons.
Universality of the NPT is the main prerequisite for its effectiveness.
Kazakhstan has repeatedly come forward in the past with the proposal to develop
clear mechanisms to influence the states intending to withdraw from the Treaty.
Based on this, we appreciate and support the Russian-American working paper
"On withdrawal from the NPT".
Mr. Chairman,
This year marks the 25th anniversary since the establishment of a popular
anti-nuclear movement, Nevada-Semipalatinsk. It brought the people of Kazakhstan
together in their desire to eliminate the nuclear threat not only in our own country,
but in the entire world. Reflecting the will of the people, President of Kazakhstan
N.Nazarbayev on 29 of August 1991 closed by his Decree the Semipalatinsk nuclear
test site. To mark these historical actions of people the Government of Kazakhstan
will organize International anti-nuclear Conference in Semipalatinsk.
This year also marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of United Nations
General Assembly Resolution (A 64/35), initiated by Kazakhstan, designating 29
August as the International Day against Nuclear Tests. We encourage the countries
to take effective measures to implement the purposes of this resolution, including
the holding of conferences and seminars with the participation of the younger
generation, mass media and NGOs.
Kazakhstan welcomes the expansion of the number of countries that have
signed and ratified the CTBT. We hope that the countries, on which the Treaty’s
entry into force depends, will sign and ratify it in the near future. A voluntary
moratorium on nuclear testing conducted by world nuclear powers today cannot
serve as an alternative to a legally binding document as the CTBT does.
We also encourage everyone join in and subscribe to the online petition of
the international project, "ATOM", containing a message to governments all
around the world to renounce nuclear testing completely and make the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty enter into force as soon as possible.
Mr. Chairman,
We highly appreciate the contribution of the Nuclear Security Summits in
strengthening the regime of non-proliferation and international security. We are
convinced that the decisions taken in The Hague, as well as, those earlier in Seoul
and Washington, accompanied by the actions of the Member States to implement 
them, will considerably strengthen nuclear security globally. They would also
minimize the threats posed by nuclear materials falling into the hands of terrorists.
We attach great importance to the development of the Fissile Material Cutoff
Treaty (FMCT). Without a doubt, this Treaty together with the CTBT, has to
become one of the main pillars of the non-proliferation regime. Kazakhstan
actively participates in the activities of the Governmental Experts Group to prepare
recommendations on the FMCT, the first meeting of which was held last month in
Geneva.
We are sure that the zones free of nuclear weapons contribute to nonproliferation
and global security. Member States of such zones shall be entitled to
the legally binding negative security assurances from the nuclear powers.
In March 2009, the entire region of Central Asia became a zone free of
nuclear weapons. We are looking forward to signing the Protocol on negative
security assurances to the Semipalatinsk Treaty by the "nuclear five".
We deeply regret that, despite the decisions of the Review Conference in
2010, one of the most important agreements to convene a conference on
establishing in the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons, and other weapons
of mass destruction, has not been implemented so far.
We hope for a constructive resolution of this situation. We look forward that
the political will of the states to reach an understanding together with trust among
the countries in the region, will help to overcome the existing range of opinions.
Establishing new zones will expand the geography of a world free from
nuclear weapons so that someday our entire planet would turn into one large
nuclear-weapons-free zone.

Mr. Chairman,
We recognize the inalienable right of every State Party of the NPT, in
accordance with the Article IV of the Treaty, for peaceful development of nuclear
energy under conditions of strict compliance with the IAEA requirements and
under control of the Agency.
The measures aimed at preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons
should not restrict the right of states for developing peaceful nuclear programmes
and the exchange of technology, equipment, experience and knowledge. We are of
the conviction that this should be done on a non-discriminatory and transparent
manner.
Along with other countries, Kazakhstan plans to develop its own full nuclear
fuel cycle for nuclear power stations and build new nuclear power plants. 
Kazakhstan stands for further enhancing the role and authority of the IAEA.
We intend to continue to work closely with IAEA on the Peaceful Uses Initiative
and the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund and make voluntary contributions to support
its initiatives and activities.
Adhering to the principle of equal access to peaceful nuclear energy,
Kazakhstan has supported the initiative of the IAEA to establish an International
Low- Enriched Uranium Bank. At the moment, we are holding intensive
negotiations regarding its placement on the territory of our state.
Establishing the Bank will contribute to guaranteeing non-discriminatory
access to nuclear fuel, strengthening the non-proliferation regime and thereby
reducing nuclear risks.
We welcome the progress in negotiations between the "six" international
mediators and the Islamic Republic of Iran to resolve the situation related to its
nuclear programme. Kazakhstan had offered a platform for two rounds of the
negotiations in 2013, and is ready to continue to provide all necessary assistance to
succeed with the future deliberations, as well.

Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Kazakhstan, which had voluntarily renounced its nuclear
status and closed the largest nuclear test site in Semipalatinsk, is a consistent
supporter of the global process of non-proliferation and disarmament, as well as,
the multilateral approach to global security issues. We intend to continue with our
intense activities and work closely with all members of the international
community in building a stable and predictable world free of the threats and terror
of the weapons of mass destruction.
Thank you for your attention. 