Check against delivery
STATEMENT
by Mr. Barlybay SADYKOV, Ambassador at Large of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the General debate of the Second session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Mr. Chair,
1. At the outset, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan I
congratulate you on assumption of the chairmanship of the Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference. Let me assure you
of our full support and cooperation in implementing your mandate.
2. The NPT as one of the cornerstones of international peace and security
plays a key role in advancing nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful
use of nuclear energy.
At this crucial point and time the current session must consolidate our collective
efforts in universalization of the NPT, elaboration of effective mechanism against the
withdrawal of states fiom the Treaty, unconditional implementation of all multilaterally
negotiated and generally approved agreements, including the Final document of the
20 10 Review Conference.
Yet 2010 Action Plan sets concrete and feasible goals, we have to admit that
more energetic work and commitment are required from our part to avoid any possible
failure with respect to coilllnon obligations.
3. Kazakhstan considers the nuclear disarmament and non-~roliferation as 1
the highest priority in our agenda.
The past few years of nuclear disarmament are marked by some
developments, such as the New START Treaty between the US and Russia,
unilateral nuclear weapons reduction initiatives by the UIC and France.
However, in a global scale nuclear disarmament still remains an aspiration
rather than action as we are under the pressure of thousands of nuclear arsenals.
Kazakhstan calls upon nuclear powers to take sincere efforts towards total
elimination of nuclear weapons in accordance with Article VI of the NPT. I also
recall of the importance of the Action 5 of the 2010 Final document that stipulates
acceleration of concrete progress and reporting on their undertakings by the 2014
Preparatory Committee.
4. A catastrophic humanitarian and environmental consequences from nuclear
tests in Semipalatinsk - and from other nuclear test sites around the globe -
demonstrate that the aftermaths of any use of nuclear weapons are uncontrollable in 
time and space. Here, I would like to note that development, production or use of
nuclear weapons is increasingly being seen worldwide as incompatible with the
international humanitarian law. The recent Oslo Conference underscored the
potential of humanitarian approaches in this dimension.
5. It is our firm conviction that total elimination of all nuclear arsenals is the
only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of such weapons. A
Nuclear weapons convention or package of agreements as it was suggested by the
United Nations Secretary-General in his Five-Point Plan for Nuclear Disarmament
acquires particular significance in terms of achieving this noble goal. I take the
opportunity to note that Kazakhstan's initiative to draft a Universal Declaration of
a Nuclear Weapon-Free World within the UN is considered as one of the effective
vessels to facilitate adoption of a Convention.
6. The NPT has indispensible role to play in alleviating contemporary
nuclear proliferation challenges. Although it has not have limited the number of
nuclear weapon states outside the Treaty's frame, we must rectify such a course of
events. We do want to believe that political will and sincere aspiration to ensure
that provisions of the Treaty on preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons
are not exhausted yet.
A voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing observed by the nuclear powers,
though an important factor of nuclear security, it cannot serve as an alternative to a
legally-binding document such as the CTBT. And an early entry into force of this
Treaty would be essential for effective implementation of the NPT.
Early start of negotiations on the Fissile Materials Cut -Off Treaty would be
important step forward in strengthening international regime of non -proliferation.
7. We call on all UN Member States to add to implementation of the UN GA
Resolution on the International Day against Nuclear Tests which is Kazakhstan's
yet another part to keeping a high alert on nuclear threat reduction. This initiative
fully corresponds with aims and objectives of the NPT.
As you may be well aware, the ATOM project launched by Kazakhstan
during the International Conference "From Nuclear test ban to a world free from
Nuclear weapons" last August in Astana (in realization of the above-mentioned
UN Resolution) continues its campaign and makes gradual progress in collecting
signatures for a Nuclear weapons test ban petition. Eventually, this document will
be forwarded to the heads of states possessing nuclear weapons, as well as the
countries which have not joined yet the CTBT or NPT. We do believe that this
kind of actions will provoke the international community to tangible steps.
Let me also note that participants of the above-mentioned Conference
organized by the Government of Kazakhstan and Parliamentarians for Nuclear
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament adopted Astana Declaration calling on heads
of states, governments and parliaments to take resolute actions for a total
elimination of nuclear weapons and advancement of non-proliferation issues. 
8. The Treaty of Semipalatinsk is an important contribution by Central Asian
countries to the peace and security in a very fragile region full of conflict potential
and challenges. We do appreciate the P5's commitment to resolve outstanding
issues and hope that practicability and effectiveness of the Treaty will be ensured
soon through consultations which have started among Central Asian states and the
P5.
We call on early convening of the Conference on the establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free from Weapons of Mass Destruction and means of their
delivery as it was stipulated by the 2010 Action Plan. The weight of this
Conference is dictated by its pivotal role in ensuring both regional and global
security.
9. Kazakhstan recognizes an important role of the IAEA in ensuring nonproliferation
and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including
the possibility of creating guaranteed nuclear fuel supply mechanism will facilitate
peaceful nuclear energy use. Kazakhstan and IAEA pursue negotiations on
establishing the International Bank for Low-Enriched Uranium under the auspices
of the Agency. We look forward for its conclusion in the nearest future.
10. Concluding my remarks, Mr. Chair, I stress our firm conviction that a
Nuclear-Weapon-Free World is an attainable goal. Kazakhstan stands ready to add
to strengthening of the NPT for total elimination of nuclear arsenals, prevention of
the spread of WMD.
I thank you. 