KAZAKHSTAN
Statement
by the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the General debate of the Second session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Geneva, April 24, 2018)
Dear Chair,
Let me first, on behalf of the delegation of Kazakhstan, congratulate
you on assumption of the chairmanship of the Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee. My delegation stands ready to provide full support to
your important work.
Despite the challenges that the NPT has been facing in recent years, there
is no doubt that it serves as a cornerstone of the architecture of international
security and global non-proliferation regime.
During the past decades, UN member-states could not reach an
agreement on a multilateral document on nuclear disarmament. In this
context, the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
(TPNW) demonstrate the increased responsibility and strong commitment on
the part of non-nuclear-weapon states.
We consider this Treaty as a clear and unambiguous signal to all nuclear
weapon possessing states. Kazakhstan signed the TPNW on 2nd March and
currently launched the internal procedures for its ratification.
At the same time, we are strongly convinced that the nuclear powers
should not be left out of the disarmament process. They must demonstrate an
example of goodwill by taking a more proactive position towards elimination
of their nuclear arsenals, in accordance with Article VI of the NPT.
2
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are issues of high
priority for Kazakhstan and, as such, demand immediate attention on the part
of global community.
In this context, Kazakhstan organized a special UN Security Council
high-level thematic briefing on January 18, 2018 under the theme “Nonproliferation
of WMD: Confidence Building Measures”.
As President Nazarbayev stated in his address to the UN Security
Council, the success or failure of the process of modernization of the global
security system directly depends on the ability of the international community
to overcome militaristic anachronisms.
Hence, we should bring political trust and a systemic dialogue back to
the international affairs.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) may serve as a
good example. The Iran nuclear deal has demonstrated a possibility for
successful multilateral diplomacy in the sphere of non-proliferation.
The similar constructive approach, in our opinion, could be applied in
the matter of settlement of North Korea’s nuclear problem. In this regard,
we welcome continuation of inter-Korean talks that have significantly reduced
tensions on the peninsula.
Mr. Chair,
Kazakhstan believes that a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing
observed by the nuclear powers, though an important factor of nuclear
security, cannot substitute a full legally-binding document such as the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). An early entry into force
of this Treaty would be essential for effective implementation of the NPT.
The decision made by President Nazarbayev in 1991 to close one of the
biggest and most actively used nuclear test sites in Semipalatinsk was the
first legal act to ban nuclear tests.
The creation of nuclear weapon free zones remains one of the most
effective measures in combating the spread of WMD. 
3
By establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia,
Kazakhstan together with its neighbors, de-legitimized nuclear weapons in a
vast region in the heart of the Eurasian continent.
I would like to take this opportunity to stress that the four of P5 States
have ratified the Protocol to the Semipalatinsk Treaty. We expect that the
U.S. will complete this process in the nearest future.
Mr. Chair,
Kazakhstan's decision to host the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium
(LEU) Bank in its territory demonstrates my country’s consistent peaceful
foreign policy and strong commitment to implementation of international
agreements. We believe that the establishment of the Bank will be yet another
practical input to guaranteed access to nuclear fuel for all States.
In conclusion, I would like to announce the publication of the book
“Reflections on the Treaty on the non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons”
(authors: Dhanapala and Rauf) with the support of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan. We appreciate the Secretariat for their kind assistance
in distribution of the book among the delegations.
Thank you for your attention.