
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation warmly congratulates you and other members of the bureau on your election to steer the work of this third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Kenya associates itseif with the statements delivered by Nigeria on behalf of the African Group and Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.
The NPT remains a crucial foundation for international peace and security. It provides us with a sound basis for strengthening international consensus towards a nuclear weapons free world. Kenya reaffirms its strong commitment to the Treaty is basic obligations and calls upon states parties to refrain from acts, which would defeat the principles and objectives of the Treaty,
My country has always advocated and continues to advocate for the total elimination of nuclear weapons as this is the only effective assurance against the use of a threat weapons. Nuclear disarmament must remain our ultimate goal given new and emerging threats such as those from terrorists. In this regard the process of reducing existing nuclear arms needs to be hastened. We have noted that while the Cold War has long ended, the tendency to cling on to vestiges of that era still persists. The continued existence of over 20,000 nuclear weapons is a dangerous anachronism.
We welcome the decision by the USA and Russia to launch a new round of negotiations on nuclear arms reduction. This is an important bilateral step that should serve to give the nuclear disarmament agenda a much needed shot in the arm. We call on other major nuclear weapons states to move expeditiously towards this positive direction and begin strategic negotiations to enhance nuclear safety and security.
The question of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) should be addressed as a matter of priority so that the Treaty can come into force, in this regard, we welcome the overtures from Washington to ratify the Treaty and appeal to all States, in particular those whose ratification is needed for the Treaty to enter into force, to do so as a matter of priority.
Mr. Chairman,
We wish to reiterate the pivotal role played by the IAEA on verification. The IAEA should be allowed to carry out its mandate in ensuring that professional and independent verification exercise is undertaken Attempts to play political games with the IAEA will only serve to weaken and render it incapable of discharging its crucial role in promoting nuclear safety.
We believe that peaceful uses of nuclear technology can be beneficial to development, especially in those regions whose economies are still struggling to develop, In this context it is important that we recognize States Parties inalienable rights to determine their energy needs and arrangements to meet those needs. The IAEA can be an important partner in ensuring a non-discriminatory approach to nuclear fuel supply and that an atmosphere of trust and cooperation exists between both suppliers as well as consumers.
The 2010 Review Conference gives us an excellent opportunity to take stock of the progress made in the implementation of the major decisions made in 1995 and 2000 Review conferences. More importantly we must address the shortcomings and challenges that still face us in addressing the complex issue of nuclear disarmament. The extent to which states have laboured to promote and implement the provisions of the NPT will determine the outcome of the Review Conference. We urge all parties to seriously engage in a frank and sincere dialogue that will at the very least drive us towards the path leading to a global nuclear disarmament arrangement.
Mr. Chairman,
I wish to conclude by stating that we are convinced that a nuclear weapons free world is very feasible, if we collectively resolve to take bold and deliberate political decisions to move to that end. This can be achieved only through political will to implement commitments and agreement to the NPT, This Prepcom must therefore set the pace and tone for the 2010 Review Conference, We are encouraged with the prevailing political atmosphere of constructive dialogue and engagement- Together we can and must succeed in avoiding the danger of a nuclear holocaust and live this world a better place than we found it.
I thank you.