It is my pleasure at the outset, to express to you, in the name of the State of Kuwait, our most sincere congratulations on your election as Chairman of the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I am also pleased to express our support to the statement delivered by the Representative of Cuba, iin the name of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement delivered by the Representative of the sisterly United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Arab Group.
Mr. Chairman,
This meeting is considered as another important step in consolidating the work of the 2010 Review Conference. Bringing about a world totally free of all nuclear weapons arsenals is a noble objective that must achieved. Out of its belief in the pivotal and important role of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in confronting the major challenges, foremost among these is banning the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The State of Kuwait, under the guidance of Hlis Highness Sheikh Sabah Al Ahmad Al Jaber Al Sabah, The Amir of the State of Kuwait, has launched an initiative to establish a bank for low-grade enriched nuclear fuel under the supervision of the IAEA to be used for peaceful and donated purposes ten million US dollars towards that effort.
Mr. Chairman,
The international community continues to witness increasing challenges that threaten international peace and security, and jeopardizes the credibility of existing international agreements and conventions, whose legacy must be supported and activated. However, we still witness a noticeable regression as what concerns achieving the universality of the NPT, the cornerstone of the disarmament regime and nuclear non-proliferation. The failure by some stales parties to the Treaty to follow-up on the implementation of the resolutions and outcomes of previous review conferences and following a selective course as what concerns the extent of their compliance with the Treaty is a serious infringement on its credibility, which undermines all efforts and endeavours, and cast a shadow of doubt over the aims and the universality of the Treaty, as well as creating et gap in the regional trust among the states, thus jeopardizing the balance of international and regional peace and stability.
The State of Kuwait absolutely believes that the possession of any nuclear weapons does not achieve security to any country. On the contrary, the proliferation of these devastating weapons will increase tensions and conflicts among peoples. This is the reason, why the State of Kuwait views with deep concern the international situation currently prevailing, particularly, since the Middle East region still faces security threats and dangers emanating from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, when after fourteen years since that 1995 Review Conference of the NPT adopted the resolution to create a zone free of all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, we find that this region is still a gross example of the failure of the effectiveness of the Treaty to achieve security for the states parties to it. Therefore, we hope that all states parties to the NPT will adhere to its provisions as well as to the provisions of the Safeguards Agreement and work closely with the International Atomic Energy Agency to resolve all the doubts arid questions that are being raised about the programs through negotiations and constructive dialogue.
Therefore, we demand from Israel, the only country in the Middle East region that has not joined the NPT, and the only country that possess nuclear weapons, in defiance of international legitimacy and repeated international calls, to immediately join the Treaty, eliminate its nuclear arsenal, and subject all its nuclear facilities to the Safeguards Regime of the IAEA. The situation of Israel represents a clear disruption in the balance of power and a constant concern for the Middle East region. The State of Kuwait demands from the international community to cease the sales of scientific and technological means which contribute to further strengthen the Israeli nuclear arsenal, or that any other country seeking to develop a program to produce weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Chairman,
The way to deal with this issue and other relevant issues has been defined very clearly in numerous agreements, conventions,, resolutions and work plans concluded between states. What is required now from the member states is to comply with the commitments, cooperate and coordinate among each other to implement their commitments. The lack of political will is the core of the issue; therefore endeavours and efforts must continue. The necessary arrangements for high fateful decisions must be taken, in order to activate the decisions agreed upon internationally. This requires bolstering our deliberations in this forum, as a general priority towards the following:
First: Full non-selective implementation of the provisions of the NPT, particularly, article 6 concerning nuclear disarmament, and article 4 concerning the facilitation of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology.
Second: Adherence to the principles contained in the final document of the Tenth Extraordinary Session of the General Assembly, the outcome of the 1995 Review Conference of the states parties to the NPT, as well as, the final document of the 2000 Review Conference, particularly what relates to the 13 practical steps.
Third: Taking more effective measures to guarantee demanding from the states not yet party to the NPT, to join immediately, in order to increase the efficiency and universality of this Treaty.
Fourth: Reaffirm the inalienable right of states to acquire the needed technology and expertise to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in the ambit allowed by the relevant international agreements.
Fifth: Work closely with the IAEA to dispel any ambiguities surrounding nuclear programs through negotiations and constructive dialogue.
Sixth: Reaffirm what was mentioned in the final declaration of the Fourth Conference on the facilitation of entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, which calls upon the member states that did not ratify the Treaty to do so.
Seventh: Support the efforts aiming to create an international legal binding instrument about the illegality of the use of nuclear weapons or the threat of their use to settle conflicts, as well as granting non-nuclear states guarantees against the use of nuclear weapons or the threat of their use by nuclear states.
Eight: Compliance and seeking to realize the decision taken in 1995 to make the Middle East region a zone free from all weapons of mass destruction.
Ninth: Establish a secondary body within the Second Committee at the 2010 Review Conference, to discuss the implementation of the resolution concerning the Middle East and define an instrument to follow-up its implementation and endorse relevant recommendations.
Tenth: Call for the convening of an international conference, according to General Assembly resolutions entitled: The Establishment of a nuc/ear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East by 2011, and call upon the IAEA to prepare all the background documents for the international conference, containing verification alternatives that can be applied within the nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the Middle East, based on previously prepared verification alternatives in the region, also in light of the follow-up by the IAEA to implement the agreements for tlhe creation of nuclear-weapons-free zones in other parts of the world.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, we hope that the workings of this preparatory session will lead to a consensus on all the main issues put forward, and that the consultations will be marked by transparency and comprehensiveness, and aim to reach the international peace and security we aspire for.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.