866 United Nations Plaza, Suite 477, New York, NY 10017, Tel.: (212) 486-4214, Fax.: (212) 486-52-59 E-mail: Kyrgyzstan@un.int
Please check against delivery
Statement by
Mr. Nuran Niyazaliev,
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Kyrgyz Republic to the United Nations,
at the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(April 30, New York)
Mr. Chairman,
I am pleased to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of
the chairmanship of the 2014 NPT Preparatory Committee. I wish you success in your
endeavors and promise you the full support of our delegation.
Mr. Chairman,
We gather in New York at a moment when the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty faces
both extraordinary challenges and new opportunities. The challenges are well known to us,
and I will not repeat them. However, it is worthwhile to observe that we meet at a time when
there also are a number of new opportunities to advance nuclear disarmament and
nonproliferation goals, several of which I would like to highlight. Before I turn to these, my
delegation would like to emphasize the importance of maintaining the positive environment
of the 2010 NPT Review Conference and the generally constructive and flexible positions
adopted by most States Parties at that meeting, which enabled us to agree on a forward
looking Action Plan and other important recommendations. It is very important that we
utilize this third and final Preparatory Committee meeting in the current review to build upon
the spirit of cooperation evident when we last met in New York in order to address the
remaining procedural issues in advance of 2015 and, if possible, make substantive
recommendations to the forthcoming Review Conference.
Toward this goal, my delegation hopes that this Preparatory Committee session will
contribute to the strengthening of the review process as envisaged by the 1995 NPT Review
and Extension Conference and help set the stage for an even more successful Review
Conference in 2015. My delegation is especially desirous that States Parties will be able to
report on the progress that has been made during the past year in implementing the Action
Plan and recommendations of the 2010 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 NPT Review Conference was noteworthy for its innovative adoption of an
Action plan format in which we now have 64 specific benchmarks against which to assess
implementation of the Final Document. My delegation looks forward to the reports by States
Parties to the Treaty, and especially those of the Nuclear Weapons States with respect to
Кыргыз Республикасынын
Бириккен Улуттар Уюмундагы
Туруктуу Өкүлдүгү
Permanent Mission
of the Kyrgyz Republic
to the United Nations 
2
concrete actions they have taken and plan to take to reduce all categories of nuclear weapons
in a transparent and irreversible fashion. My delegation also shares the views of those States
Parties, who attach particular importance to the expeditious ratification and entry into force of
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, a treaty my country ratified in 2003.
Mr. Chairman,
One of the most promising approaches to disarmament and nonproliferation is the
creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones. As was highlighted at the Second International
Conference on Nuclear Weapon-Free Zones in 2010, nuclear-weapon-free zones cover the
entire Southern Hemisphere, and also extend into the Northern Hemisphere, including
territory on which nuclear weapons were previously based. The Kyrgyz Republic takes pride
in the entry-into-force in 2009 of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. Among the
innovative features of that zone are provisions that call for efforts to remediate the
environmental damage to the region resulting from prior nuclear weapons activities and the
requirement for parties to adhere to the IAEA Additional Protocol. We remain hopeful that
Nuclear Weapons States will soon provide negative security assurances to parties to the
Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the form of legally-binding protocols to the
Treaty.
As a member of one of the newest nuclear-weapon-free zones, my country also shares
the concerns of many NPT States Parties that we can ill afford further delay in implementing
fully the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East and the convening of a Conference on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction as mandated by the 2010 NPT Review Conference. Although we are disappointed
that a date has not yet been agreed upon for the Conference in Helsinki, we are encouraged by
the meetings that have been held in Glion, Switzerland during the past six months, and we
remain optimistic that the Conference will be convened by the end of this year.
Mr. Chairman,
The Kyrgyz Republic has always regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear
nonproliferation regime, and it continues to do so. It also recognizes, however, that the world
has changed significantly in recent years. New proliferation challenges have emerged and old
ways of doing business will no longer suffice. In order for it to remain viable, the Treaty and
the broader regime must adapt to changing circumstances, which include the growing risk of
nuclear terrorism.
My delegation regards international safeguards and physical protection of nuclear materials
and facilities as the first line of defense against nuclear terrorism. As such, the Kyrgyz
Republic strongly endorses the International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to strengthen
the international safeguards system, including adoption of the Additional Protocol as the
safeguards standard. The Kyrgyz Republic also supports efforts to strengthen the Convention
on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and to implement United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1540 in order to address the proliferation challenges posed by non-state actors,
and it welcomes the practical measures identified in the Communiqués of the 2010, 2012, and
2014 Nuclear Security Summits. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic with support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Security Council 
3
Committee 1540 and the Office for Disarmament Affairs has adopted the National Plan of
Action on implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in 2013. Taking this opportunity I would
like to thank those countries and organizations that offered assistance in implementation of
the National Action Plan.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation attaches great importance to the issue of mitigating the environmental
consequences of uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities in the production
of nuclear weapons, a subject identified at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference
and addressed at all subsequent Review Conferences. In this regard I would like to refer to the
UN General Assembly resolution 68/218 of December 2013 entitled “The role of the
international community in averting the radiation threat in Central Asia” that calls upon the
international community to continue the active sharing of experience and knowledge so as to
effectively resolve the problems of uranium and other radioactive and toxic tailings in Central
Asia. The Kyrgyz Republic would like to reiterate the call made at prior Review Conferences,
for all governments and international organizations that have expertise in the field of clean-up
and disposal of radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assistance as may be
requested for remedial purposes in these affected areas.
It is the view of my delegation that environmental consequences of uranium mining
and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities related to the production of nuclear weapons is an
important but often neglected dimension of the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, and
we would welcome the inclusion of this issue in future discussions about humanitarian
consequences.
My delegation also wishes to draw attention to another vital but often neglected issue -
the role of education and training as tools to promote disarmament and nonproliferation. The
Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the inclusion in the 2010 Final Document of Action 22, which
calls on all states to implement the recommendations of the UN study on disarmament and
nonproliferation education.
 We appreciate the leadership shown by Japan, among other States Parties, in continuing to
raise the issue of education and training in the NPT context, and we look forward to working
with other interested member States in developing practical steps to promote full
implementation of the measures called for by the UN study.
Mr. Chairman,
As we begin the third session of the 2015 NPT Review Conference my delegation
recognizes the enormous challenges we face with respect to nuclear disarmament,
nonproliferation, and peaceful use, as well as the need for timely action. We pledge to work
with you and other States Parties to find common ground and to put in place practical means
to ensure the long-term integrity, effectiveness, and relevance of the NPT.
Thank you. 