

Mr. President: 
Allow me to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the 2000 Review Conference. As the first Review Conference after the historic indefinite extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, this meeting has special significance. It comes at a time of increased challenges to the global nonproliferation regime, and it provides an opportunity to revive and reinforce the spirit of cooperation for nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament evident at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference. My delegation pledges to work with you, Mr. President, to achieve that outcome. It is critically important that the 2000 Review Conference serve as an effective forum for substantive debate on those issues which the States Parties regard as important to the future of the nonproliferation regime. 
At the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the Kyrgyz Republic applauded the adoption without a vote of three interconnected decisions and a resolution on the Middle East. Today, at the 2000 Review Conference, it is our task to build upon this future-oriented set of decisions. It is especially important to recognize that we are now engaged in a qualitatively different review process, no longer confined to a retrospective examination of NPT implementation. Guided by the 1995 Principles and Objectives and the mandate of the decision on Strengthening the Review Process, we need to look forward and identify practical means to strengthen the implementation of the NPT in all its dimensions and to achieve its universality. Toward that end, Mr. President, my delegation hopes that this conference will produce two final documents. One of these would be a review document evaluating the results of the implementation of the Treaty during the past five years. The other would be a forward-looking document outlining the areas in which and the means by which further progress can be achieved. 
As we appraise what the NPT regime has accomplished, we should acknowledge that the initial high expectations that followed the 1995 Review and Extension Conference remain only partly fulfilled. Completion of the negotiation of a Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1996 represents the most striking progress that has been made on the disarmament front. The May 1998 nuclear tests conducted in South Asia and the rejection of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty by the U.S. Senate in 1999, however, demonstrate the fragile and incomplete nature of the disarmament process and the urgency of the task at hand. Although the Test Ban Treaty is not perfect, it provides us with the best available opportunity to realize one of the long-standing objectives of the NPT, and we hope that the Review Conference will call for its early entry into force. 
Another positive development since 1995 has been the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa and Southeast Asia. Negotiated nuclear-weapon-free zones now cover the whole of the Southern Hemisphere, in addition to Antarctica, the seabed, and outer space, and constitute one of the most promising approaches to nonproliferation and disarmament. 
In this regard, the significant progress that has been made in creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia is noteworthy. The five Central Asian states share the belief that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at between our states, and taking into account its special characteristics, will strengthen peace and security at the regional and global levels. The events in South Asia in May of 1998 highlighted the importance of regional approaches to disarmament and nonproliferation, by which members of the international community can strengthen the global nonproliferation regime at a time when it faces serious challenges and dangers. 
Mr. President, 
The Kyrgyz Republic would like to call particular attention to the efforts, under United Nations auspices, of a working group on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. In July 1998, the working group held a meeting in Bishkek involving the five Central Asian States, the five nuclear weapons states, the United Nations, and International Atomic Energy Agency. The group has also held meetings in Geneva, Tashkent, New York, and Sapporo, the most recent one of which concluded earlier this month. As a result of these meetings, our states have produced a nearly completed treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. We are grateful to the United Nations, the Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the Government of Japan for their support of negotiations for establishing this zone. We would welcome the continued assistance of interested international organizations and states as this process moves to completion. 
These positive developments, however, do not in themselves guarantee the continued integrity of the NPT. Stringent accountability by all parties to the NPT - especially by the nuclear-weaponstate parties - is required. Regrettably, the slow pace of nuclear arms reductions since 1995 gives rise to sentiments that the nuclear-weapons-states are not pursuing their disarmament obligations in good faith. In order to eliminate these doubts, it is important for the nuclear weapons states to reaffirm their commitment to nuclear disarmament as specified under Article VI of the NPT. It is also incumbent on these states to realize this commitment. 
The Kyrgyz Republic shares the concerns expressed by the United Nations Secretary-General in his report to the Millennium Assembly about the stalemate in strategic arms control and the absence today of negotiations to reduce tactical nuclear weapons. The need to reduce and eliminate this latter category of nuclear weapons also was underlined by a research project sponsored by the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), whose initial findings were presented at a conference in Geneva in March 2000. Among the sound recommendations of the UNIDIR study is for the issue of tactical nuclear weapons disarmament to receive more attention at this Review Conference. 
Mr. President, 
My delegation also wishes to associate itself with other speakers who stress the importance of moving forward on such important nonproliferation and disarmament matters as the implementation of START II, the prompt negotiation of START III, reductions in the alert levels of currently deployed nuclear weapons, accelerated negotiation of a convention banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive purposes, and deeper reductions in and safeguarding of stockpiles of weapons-usable fissile material. My delegation notes with regret the current deadlock in the Conference on Disarmament, which impedes progress towards a convention banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. This Review Conference may wish to consider alternative means of moving this important aspect of the disarmament agenda forward. 
My delegation also would like to express concern about the possible negative implications for the global nonproliferation regime of the deployment of national ballistic missile defenses, currently under consideration by some countries. While the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty is not subject to review at this conference, the impact its possible collapse would have on the implementation of the NET is a topic that the conference should consider. 
Mr. President, 
My delegation would also like to see the Review Conference closely examine other issues related to compliance by states Parties with the NPT. In this regard, the Kyrgyz Republic strongly endorses the International Atomic Energy Agency's strengthened safeguards system, based on the Model Additional Protocol. The Kyrgyz republic has signed a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency on 18 March 1998, and plans in the near future to negotiate an additional protocol to that agreement. 
The process of disarmament requires strict procedures for the safe handling, transport, storage, and disposal of sensitive nuclear material. We believe the Review Conference should consider taking new steps to reinforce export controls, to strengthen nuclear safety practices for the transportation of nuclear materials, to enhance physical protection measures, to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear materials, and to develop more effective means to counter the threat of nuclear terrorism. 
Mr. President, 
The Kyrgyz Republic also believes more attention should be given to mitigating the environmental consequences of past and present nuclear weapons programs. As noted in the report of the Main Committee III of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, which was adopted by consensus, there have been exceptional instances in which serious environmental consequences have resulted from uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel-cycle activities in the production of nuclear weapons. 
This often overlooked environmental problem caused by nuclear weapons production and borne by the Kyrgyz Republic, among other states, is another reason why we attach such great importance to the work of this Review Conference. We would like to reiterate the call made at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference for all Governments and international organizations that have expertise in the field of cleanup and disposal of radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assistance as may be requested for remedial purposes in these affected areas. 
Today, as we enter the new millennium, we are at a critical juncture, which may well determine the future of the NPT. Old ways of thinking are no longer adequate for the new and difficult challenges confronting the nonproliferation regime. Although the NPT is strong in numbers and in the benefits it provides states Parties, we must avoid complacency. It, like any living organism, requires ongoing care and nurturing. Mr. President, my delegation welcomes the opportunity at this Review Conference to work with you and other states Parties to ensure the long-term integrity and effectiveness of the NPT.
Thank you, Mr. President.

