Allow me to begin by congratulating you, on behalf of the delegation of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, on your election to the presidency of the present 2005 Review Conference of the State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are confident that with your rich experience and high competence in multilateral diplomacy, you will guide the work of this important forum to a successful conclusion. My delegation assures you of its full support and cooperation in the discharge of your duties.
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement delivered by H.E. Mr. Hamid Syed Albar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, on behalf of the NAM State Parties to the NPT. However, we would like to highlight some points of great significance to the world peace and security as follows:
Mr. President,
The situation in which we are today, remains far from being stable. We are still witnessing acts of violence, hunger, disease and poverty in many parts of the world. At the same time, humankind cannot live without fear and threat, particularly that of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). This is due to the fact that the commitment the international community made 35 years ago to rid the world of nuclear weapons has not been met. Nor have nuclear arsenals been decreased or dismantled. On the contrary, those weapons grew tremendously, both in quantity and quality. So did the number of nuclear-weapon States (NWS), thus posing a grave danger to international peace and security. This also increased the risk of WMDs falling into the hands of terrorists. In the face of this situation, efforts should be made seriously and honestly by all states concerned, particularly the nuclear- weapon States which have the legal obligations to fulfill under article VI of the Treaty namely to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects.
In 1995 the international community extended the NPT and strongly reaffirmed its crucial role in the promotion of nuclear disarmament, the prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation as well as the enhancement of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In other words, the non-nuclear-weapon States again agreed not to develop nor acquire nuclear weapons and NWS agreed to negotiate in good faith to achieve nuclear disarmament. In the meantime, the implementation of these agreements is much left to be desired. As a matter of fact, existing nuclear weapons continue to pose the greatest danger to the survival of the civilization of mankind. We share the deep concern that nuclear weapons have been modernized, some nuclear-weapon States moreover, have set out new rationale for the use of these inhumane weapons. The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) has also remained ineffective.
My delegation emphasizes that the NPT is a key instrument in the efforts to halt the vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons and an essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. We remain deeply concerned about the strategic defense doctrine that set out the rationales for the use of nuclear weapons. We call for the full and effective implementation of the unequivocal commitment made by the nuclear-weapon States at the 2000 Review Conference to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament. This undertaking should be demonstrated without delay through an accelerated process of negotiations and through the full implementation of the 13 steps to advance systematically and progressively toward a nuclear-weapon-free world as agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference.
The performance of the NPT over the past years has not yielded expected results. The negotiations on banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and other explosive devices have yet to begin. It is regrettable that very little progress on this issue has been achieved. In this regard, we earnestly hope that the Conference on Disarmament would early conclude the negotiations for a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and other explosive devices, taking into account both nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives. In this context, we strongly support the proposal for the establishment of an appropriate Ad Hoc Committee on Nuclear Disarmament.
Mr. President,
Having learnt from experiences of the past about nuclear weapons danger, we cannot but stress the need for the international community to make every effort to ensure that mankind live in a world of 21st Century without the threat of nuclear weapons. We reaffirm that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and we further reaffirm that non- nuclear-weapon States should be effectively assured by nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. To this end, my delegation hopes that this conference, at its current session, would lay the groundwork for State Parties to the Treaty to agree to negotiate and conclude a legally binding instrument to assure the non-nuclear- weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. We believe that the Review Conference should also substantially focus on the issue of security assurances. At the 2000 NPT Review Conference, the NPT States Parties agreed that legally binding security assurances by the five nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties will strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and called on the Prep-Com to make recommendations to the 2005 Review Conference on this issue.
The Lao PDR welcomes the outcome of the Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, which was held in Tlatelolco, Mexico City on April 26-28, 2005. We support the efforts aimed at establishing Nuclear- Weapon-Free Zones in all regions of the world and call for cooperation and broad consultations in order to achieve agreements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned. In this context, it is essential that nuclear-weapon States should provide unconditional assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons to all States of the zones.
Mr. President,
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty ( CTBT) is a major instrument of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. We reaffirm the importance and urgency of the entry into force of the CTBT and we call upon all States that have not yet ratified the Treaty, particularly those States whose ratification is required for its entry into force, to do so without delay.
Undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of material, equipment and technology, for peaceful purposes continue to persist. We are of the view that non- proliferation control arrangements should be transparent and open to participation by all States and should ensure that they do not impose restrictions on access to material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes required by developing countries for continued development. Furthermore such arrangements should pursue and implement without exception the condition of adherence to IAEA comprehensive safeguards and to the NPT, as a condition for supply or cooperation by States not parties to the NPT. In this context, we recognize the importance of the inalienable right of the State Parties to the NPT to develop research, produce and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination in accordance with Article IV of the Treaty.
Mr. President,
35 years ago, commitments have been made. My delegation believes that this conference will provide an excellent opportunity for all State Parties to look into all possible ways and means for the implementation of those commitments. With concerted efforts and high sense of responsibility for world peace and security and destiny of mankind, we should all work together and adopt a set of concrete measures for action to ensure that the provisions of the NPT and the decisions adopted in 1995 be fully implemented, thereby contributing to the achievement of the ultimate goal of the Treaty: the building of a world free from nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Mr. President.
