Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Nfl Review
Conference ofthe Parties to the Treaty on the Non
Proliferation ofNuclear Weapons (NPT)
Statement by
THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA
Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Mr Chainnan,
At the outset I would like to congratulate you on your election
as the Chairman ofthe first Preparatory Committee ofthe 2020
NPT Review Conference. Let me assure you that you may count
on the full support and cooperation of my delegation during this
Preparatory Committee.
Latvia associates itselfwith the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union. I would like to add the following remarks
in a national capacity.
Mr Chairman,
For Latvia the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone ofthe global non-proliferation and
disarmament regimes. Latvia is strongly committed to the full
implementation of the NPT and welcomes the substantial
progress made under its three mutually reinforcing pillars.
Latvia shares the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
However, if our goal is effective, verifiable and irreversible
nuclear disarmament, there can be no shortcuts. In this respect
we should be cautious and should refrain from creating parallel
processes that might loosen the focus from the strategic
importance ofNPT.
The road ahead will be complex. Both nuclear and non-nuclear
weapon states have to be on board. At the current security
juncture it will be of utmost importance to find the right balance
between working towards multiple steps that strengthen the NPT
and preserving the international order in today’s turbulent
world.
The “building blocks” outlined in the Action Plan 2010 are the
key for achieving progress in global nuclear disarmament efforts
and Latvia urges their continued full and substantive step by
step implementation.
I would like to reiterate the call for immediate commencement
of negotiations on a Pissile Material Cut-off Treaty in the
framework of the Conference on Disarmament. Latvia
welcomes the establishment of the High Level Expert
Preparatory Group to help bringing the process back on track.
Latvia also welcomes the establishment of the Group of
Governmental Experts to consider the role of verification in
advancing nuclear disarmament
Latvia also places great importance to the prompt entry into
force ofthe Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. Recent
nuclear tests carried out by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are serious reminders why work towards the entry
into force of the CTBT should be high on our agenda. Latvia
continues to strongly condemn the illegal nuclear tests and
launches of ballistic missiles conducted by the DPRK and urges
DPRK to refrain from any further actions that might increase
tensions.
Mr Chairman,
During the recent years we have witnessed that international
efforts in the field of non-proliferation have brought some
tangible results. Latvia welcomes Iran’s efforts in successful
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
The continuous full implementation of JCPOA will strengthen
global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament efforts in the
long-term. In this regard for several years Latvia has made
voluntary contributions in support ofthe JCPOA.
In contrast, Latvia is deeply worried that one party has violated
core provisions of the Budapest memorandum on security
assurances to Ukraine. Such actions significantly erode the level
oftrust and undermine nuclear non-proliferation efforts.
It is of paramount importance that disarmament and non
proliferation commitments under existing treaties are honoured,
In this regard, we also call on all Parties to ensure the full and
verifiable implementation of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces Treaty.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Agency’s safeguards
system plays an essential central role in the implementation of
the non-proliferation obligations under the NPT. 1AEA’s
contribution in assistance to the Member States in ensuring the
highest levels of safety and security to facilitate the peaceful use
of nuclear energy should be also underlined,
To conclude, I wish every success in our efforts to achieve best
results out of this first NPT Preparatory Committee to have
tangible results in 2020 NPT Review Conference.
Thank you!