Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Statement by
The Republic of Latvia
Geneva, 25 April 2018
Mr Chairman,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman
of the Second Preparatory Committee of the 2020 NPT Review Conference. Let
me assure you of the full cooperation of the Latvian delegation. Latvia fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I
would like to make the following remarks in a national capacity.
Mr Chairman,
In the light of its 50th anniversary in 2020, the NPT remains a cornerstone of the
global non-proliferation and disarmament regime and a major achievement in
international security. Hence, it should be our responsibility to uphold and
preserve the NPT as a key multilateral instrument, to promote its
universalization and strengthen its implementation.
Latvia is strongly committed to the full implementation of the NPT and
welcomes the progress made under its three mutually reinforcing pillars: nonproliferation,
disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We have to
preserve this progress and move forward with all the obligations and
commitments assumed under the NPT.
Global community is faced with a multitude of emerging security challenges
that should be addressed multilaterally. At the current security juncture a unified
approach to proliferation and associated security threats is required more than
ever. Both nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states have to be on board.
Latvia strongly supports efforts aimed at achieving peaceful and diplomatic
solution to end the DPRK’s nuclear program. We welcome DPRK`s decision to
suspend nuclear and ballistic missile tests. It is important to continue efforts to
find lasting solution for regional and global peace and stability. This will require
DPRK`s full compliance with the NPT and other international obligations,
including its complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
In recent years international efforts in the field of non-proliferation have brought
some tangible results. We have to acknowledge the continued relevance of the 
JCPOA. It is crucial that all parties maintain a constructive and balanced
approach to fully implement the deal, while addressing concerns raised outside
the JCPOA.
Mr Chairman,
The “building blocks” outlined in the NPT Action Plan 2010 are more relevant
than ever and we should urge for their continued full and substantive step-bystep
implementation.
We have to revisit our disarmament and non-proliferation commitments and act
upon them. State Parties should move forward with their support to the FMCT,
which they broadly reaffirmed at the 2010 NPT Review Conference. Immediate
commencement of negotiations on the FMCT in the framework of the
Conference on Disarmament is of utmost importance. Latvia supports the work
of the High Level FMCT Expert Preparatory Group, established by the UNGA
resolution 71/259.
The CTBT is of crucial importance to Latvia, and its entry into force and
universalization is still a top priority. CTBT is an indispensable tool in our
efforts to advance global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We
reiterate our call on all States that have not yet done so, in particular those listed
in Annex 2, to sign and ratify the Treaty.
A comprehensive verification regime that would eventually enable a world
without nuclear weapons remains to be designed. The International Partnership
for Nuclear Disarmament Verification (IPNDV) is one of the few examples that
have made a substantial contribution to this end.
Latvia would also like to stress the importance of the IAEA in assuring the
implementation of the NPT`s third pillar of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Its
safeguards system plays an essential role in the implementation of the nonproliferation
obligations under the NPT. IAEA’s assistance to the Member
States in ensuring the highest levels of safety and security that benefits us all
should be underlined.
Mr Chairman,
It is crucial that disarmament and non-proliferation commitments under existing
treaties are honored. In this regard, preservation of the INF Treaty is vital for
international peace, security and stability. We would like to see Russia
addressing any concerns regarding its compliance in a substantial and 
transparent way and actively engage in a constructive dialogue with the United
States.
Latvia also remains deeply worried that core provisions of the Budapest
memorandum on security assurances to Ukraine continue to be violated. Such
actions significantly erode the level of trust and undermine nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts.
Mr Chairman,
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Latvia’s full support and commitment to
the aforementioned instruments and initiatives that lead us to a safer world with
undiminished security for all. Latvia is committed to contribute to a rules based
international order, including through chairing the Nuclear Suppliers Group for
the period of 2018-2019.
Thank you!