It gives me great pleasure to join my colleagues who have already congratulated you on being elected as the chairman of the Conference. I would like to express to you my full confidence that your wisdom and distinguished experience will enable you to lead our work in the best way. I wish also to congratulate the other members of the Bureau on their election, and assure them of our cooperation and support.
Mr. President,
My country's delegation aligns itself with the statement made by H.E. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, on behalf of the Members States of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the statement made by H.E. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, on behalf of the African Group, as well as the statement made by The Permanent Representative of the Republic of Lebanon, on behalf of the Arab group.
Mr. President,
The 2010 Review Conference of The States Parties to the Non- Proliferation Treaty is convened to review the Treaty, after four decades since its conclusion. Unfortunately, the efforts in the disarmament sphere still lack balance and objectivity, and are influenced by selective and unfair policies. This is evident by the continued existence of huge nuclear arsenals and the development of new weapons by a number of states, in disregard to the NPT. As well as the lack of progress in the implementation of the thirteen practical steps approved by the 2000 Review Conference. Furthermore, little progress has been made with respect to the decisions issued by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, particularly the Resolution concerning the establishment of a Nuclear- Weapon Free -zone in The Middle East, which has not enjoyed the serious international will and support necessary for its implementation. Of a particular concern arc the ideas being circulated by some powers which tend to tie the implementation of The Resolution on the Middle East to measures and conditions which may not be realized, even in the long run, because of the intransigent Israeli attitude. This simply means that the Resolution will be reversed and that the international community, especially the depositary states of the NPT, which sponsored the Resolution, will no longer feel committed to its implementation.
The initiative and practical steps which Libya took voluntarily in 2003 to dispose of all its nuclear and chemical armament and programs have convinced Libya that the Non-Proliferation Regime cannot be sustained unless the Nuclear-Weapon States prove practically that they are committed to the implementation of the NPT provisions, and that they too abide by the principles of transparency and verifiability in their nuclear disarmament procedures, in accordance with a fixed timeframe, in order to achieve the final goal of total elimination of those weapons.
Mr. President,
The problem of lack of balance in the field of nuclear disarmament and non proliferation is clearly manifested in the mandate of the IAEA. This Agency, described as "International", was given a selective mandate so that it can only concentrate on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons through ascertaining that nuclear materials are not converted from nuclear uses to military ones. The role of the Agency, however, did not include the verification of the implementation by the Nuclear-Weapon States of their commitments to the reduction and disarmament of their nuclear arsenals. This reflects a serious defect in the balance between nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
As the Brother Leader, Mummar Al-Gathafi, pointed out in his statement before the General Assembly on 23/9/2009, the IAEA must have the mandate to inspect the nuclear facilities of all states, without discrimination, so that this Agency can be described as truly "international", i.e. that it has a universal character. In my statement before the Security Council Summit on Non-Proliferation on 24/9/2009, I said that "the IAEA should supervise all nuclear facilities of all States, without exception, and that the Israeli Demona Nuclear Reactor must be subjected to inspection, or otherwise, all countries in The Middle East should have the right to acquire nuclear weapons."
In order to address this imbalance, Libya believes that the time has come for all nuclear-weapon States and all States not party to the Non- Proliferation Treaty to place all their nuclear facilities under IAEA full- scope safeguards. This should be set forth in an agreement to be negotiated and concluded with IAEA in accordance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the IAEA statute, for the exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of the obligations of nuclear-weapon States, with a view to providing baseline data for future disarmament and preventing further diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, as well as the prohibition of the transfer of all nuclear-related equipment, information, material and facilities and resources or devices and the extension of assistance in the nuclear scientific or technological fields to States not parties to the Treaty without exception.
Libya believes that, taking such steps will put to the practical test the validity of the commitments made by both Nuclear and Non-Nuclear- Weapon States. It will also reveal the validity and the seriousness of the declared intentions concerning the establishment of a world free from nuclear weapons.
Mr. President,
The world has seen some hope that progress in the field of nuclear disarmament can be made, in the light of the positive statements made by some leaders of Nuclear-Weapon States in which they indicated their commitments to work towards the achievement of the desired goal, namely the establishment of world free form nuclear weapons, and the declaration by the President of the United States, Mr. Obama, that his country is committed to work towards the ratification of the CTBT, and the continuation of the negotiations on FMCT.
In this respect, Libya welcomes the singing of the agreement between the United States and the Russian Federation on 8/4/2010, concerning the reduction of the strategic nuclear weapons of the two countries, as a step towards the complete nuclear disarmament. We call for the adoption of additional concrete steps in this field, as the stockpiles of nuclear weapons still possessed by the two countries, even after the new agreement is implemented, will be sufficient to destroy life on earth several times.
The total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee to prevent the use or the threat of use of those weapons. Until that goal is achieved, we should urgently work towards the conclusion of a universal, unconditioned, and legally binding instrument to guarantee the security of the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, and their protection from the use, or the threat of use, of nuclear arms against them. Such guarantees will certainly enhance the NPT. In this respect, we support the proposal calling for the establishment of a subsidiary body in the Review Conference, entrusted with the security guarantees, which will work towards the achievement of this goal.
Mr. President,
It is particularly important that balance is maintained in the implementation of the three pillars of the NPT, namely Nuclear Disarmament, Nuclear Non-Proliferation, and the Peaceful uses of nuclear technology in a non-discriminatory manner. Such a balance will render the Treaty more effective, as the concentration of efforts on Nuclear Non- Proliferation only, especially horizontal one, while neglecting Nuclear Disarmament, or limiting the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, constitute a source of serious concern, and contravenes the Treaty and its comprehensive and non-discriminatory application.
One of the important factors for the achievement of the desired balance in the implementation of the NPT is to guarantee the inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. From this perspective, no provision in the Treaty should be interpreted in a manner that limits this right, or affect negatively the right of The States Parties to develop, produce, and use nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Article IV of the NPT is very clear in this respect, and does not need any reinterpretation, as this article did not place any preconditions on the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, which are parties to the Treaty, as far as the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is concerned.In this respect, we emphasize that the IAEA is the only competent authority responsible for the verification and ascertainment that all States Parties comply with the safeguards agreements which they implement in fulfillment of their Treaty obligations. Such action will prevent the conversion of the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to the production of nuclear weapons, and other nuclear explosive devices. The Agency should also be the center for the international coordination of technical cooperation in the nuclear field; Libya believes that any form of cooperation, regardless of whether it is intended for peaceful or military purposes, between States Parties and States not Party to NPT, constitutes a stark violation of the letter, spirit, and objectives of the Treaty. Such cooperation is not conducive to the achievement of the universality of the Treaty; in fact it will threaten the credibility of the Treaty and strongly contradict its purposes and principles.
Mr. President,
My country supports all international efforts to establish nuclear weapon free zones in all parts of the world; as such zones constitute a real contribution to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard we welcome the entry into force on 15/7/2009 of the Treaty that declares Africa a nuclear weapons free zone (Pelindaba).
In this regard, we also call for the implementation of the IAEA Resolution adopted in September 2009 entitled "Israeli Nuclear capabilities".
As Israel is the only country in the region which has neither acceded, nor declared its desire to accede, to the NPT, it stands as an obstacle on the path to achieve the universality of the Treaty. The international community and its institutions, especially the depositary States, must exert pressure on Israel to accede to the Treaty, without delay, as a Non-Nuclear-Weapon State, and to subject all its nuclear facilities to the Comprehensive Safeguards regime of the IAEA, and relinquish its nuclear arms in accordance with the provisions of the Security Council resolution (487) 1981.This is essential in order to reach the desired goal, namely to render The Middle East a Nuclear-Weapon-Free zone, and prevent a nuclear arms race in the region.
In light of the above, one of the factors which will make this conference successful is to reach an agreement on taking practical steps towards the implementation of the Resolution on the Middle East adopted by The States Parties at the 1995 Review and Extension conference of the Treaty, as outlined in The Arab Group Paper submitted to this conference. We wish to highlight, in this respect, the following measures:
• Convening an international conference in accordance with the General Assembly resolutions entitled "The Establishment of a Nuclear- Weapon-Free Zone in The Middle East", in order to commence negotiations on the establishment of that free zone by the year 2011.
The establishment of a Standing Committee composed of members of the Bureau of the 2010 Review Conference to follow up intersession ally the implementation of the recommendations concerning the 1995 Middle East Resolution.
The establishment of a subsidiary body of the 2010 Review Conference under the Second Committee to discuss the implementation of the resolution on the Middle East, determine a mechanism for its implementation and agree on related recommendations.
Thank you Mr. President.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 16


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 15


Mr. President,


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 1


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 6


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 17


i


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 6


Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



