Check against delivery
National Statement of the REPUBLIC of LITHUANIA
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Second session, Geneva, 23 April- 4 May 2018
Mr. Chairman,
Let me congratulate you, Ambassador Bugajski, on assuming the duties of the Chair of the second
Preparatory Committee meeting of the 2020 NPT Review Conference. Lithuanian delegation stands
ready to support you in achieving a successful conclusion to this Session. We appreciate an allinclusive
and succinct manner in which you have navigated the preparations to ensure a
comprehensive review cycle and wish success to the Polish chairmanship. Lithuanian position is well
reflected in the European Union statement and we would like to highlight a few aspects in our
national capacity.
Upholding and preserving the NPT as a multilateral instrument for reinforcing international peace,
security and stability is the principal goal that is to be pursued systematically and with equal
determination across all three pillars, by all states parties. Success of the 2020 NPT Review cycle
depends on us as the states parties. We must remain committed to these fundamental principles
and achieve outcomes that strengthen non-proliferation and disarmament, and facilitate access to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
While it is fair to assume that some states parties may tend to favor a more composed progression
over a struggle for prompt outcomes on the most delicate dossiers, the protection of the Treaty’s
credibility and integrity is of paramount importance to us. All obligations and commitments assumed
under the Treaty or undertaken during previous Review Conferences have to be duly implemented.
We underscore the necessity to progress towards the full implementation of Article VI and
progressive reductions to both strategic and non-strategic arsenals of deployed and non-deployed
nuclear weaponry. We anticipate the nuclear weapon states to exercise leadership in this regard
and non-nuclear weapon states to comply with their Treaty obligations and International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards agreements, and strive to reinforce the Treaty's non-proliferation regime.
As a member state of NATO, Lithuania stands behind the core principle of NATO's nuclear posture
based on the premise all nuclear-weapon states of the Alliance maintain full control and custody of
their nuclear weapons. NATO’s nuclear arrangements were already in place and part of the acquis
of the Treaty when the NPT was negotiated and entered into force, with the primary intent to
prevent further spread of nuclear weapons, and to preserve peace.
Continuous efforts in confidence-building, transparency, and verification activities and reporting are
commendable. In this light, we reiterate the importance of preserving the integrity of the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, an essential instrument to the international
security and strategic stability, only ensured by a full and verifiable compliance of its Parties.
Mr. Chairman,
We observe with regret that the circumstances for achieving disarmament without compromising
security and international stability, are not favorable today. We continue to support an operable
protocol to nuclear disarmament via continuous practical systematic approach, within the existent
framework of complementary treaties, institutions and commitments in support of achieving and 
Check against delivery
maintaining a world without nuclear weapons. Given the current arduous geopolitical environment,
prudence demands we stay realistic. Therefore, we remain incredulous that delegitimization of
nuclear weapons would productively add to the harmonization of the disarmament and security
ends.
The international community is again confronted with the proliferation crises that pose a grave
threat to the international peace, security and non-proliferation regime. We urge the DPRK to return
to full compliance with the NPT and its associated safeguards agreement, as its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes remain a matter of serious international concern. In the meantime, a maximum
pressure on the DPRK is needed to compel it to take a credible path towards a complete
denuclearization.
We condemn in the strongest terms chemical weapon use in Syria, which adds to the number of
Syria's blatant violations of its non-proliferation obligations in relation to weapons of mass
destruction. We echo yet another call upon Syria to resolve its non-compliance with its Safeguards
Agreement alongside outstanding issues in full cooperation with the IAEA and to adhere to the
Additional Protocol. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement combined with an Additional Protocol
should be recognized as the basic standard of verification.
On an affirmative note, the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on
Iran is testament to the determination of the international community to ensure NPT commitments
are respected and upheld. Lithuania continues to view the JCPOA as a long-term comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear program.
Mr. Chairman,
We support the right of state parties to develop peaceful nuclear energy, within a framework that
reduces proliferation risk and adheres to the international safeguards standards. Lithuania
recognizes the value many states place on access to the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy. Nuclear
security cannot be upheld in isolation from nuclear safety; and both must be dealt with in a
coordinated and consistent manner. Consistency with IAEA safety standards, transparency, respect
to the reasoned interests of the neighboring countries and international law, alongside advanced
safety culture are of key importance in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
Across its three monumental pillars, NPT stands among the most successful and significant of
multilateral treaties.
In order to realize progress across all three pillars, we must build bridges across the issues that divide
us, and seek consensus on areas where we can progress. We recognize that this will require a
massive amount of political will, flexibility and determination to rise above unproductive debates
and uphold commitments enshrined in the Treaty.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.