Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,
I would like to begin by wishing success to you, Ambassador Libran N. Cabactulan, recognizing the difficult task and great responsibility that awaits us. My delegation is confident that under your able leadership the Review Conference will successfully achieve its objectives. You may count, Mr. President,-on the co-operation and full support of my delegation.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement made by the distinguished EU High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton on behalf of the European Union and wishes to reflect on some issues of particular importance to our country.
Mr. President,
Today, after forty years since the Treaty entered into force, we are facing new nuclear dangers such as clandestine proliferation, threats emanating from nuclear terrorism, withdrawal from the NPT. To tackle new challenges the nuclear non-proliferation regime needs to be strengthen based on progress in all three mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT - disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Lithuania welcomes the agreement between the United States of America and the Russian Federation on the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) and the resultsof the Global Nuclear Security Summit that lay a firm background for intensified international cooperation.
Lithuania has been playing an active role in Proliferation Security Initiative and supports the principles of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which give a new impetus for enhanced cooperation to prevent illegal transfers of nuclear material and equipment. In this regard, multilateral export control regimes are important tools. Therefore, we deem efforts to strengthen and extend the control regime which now includes all the EU states and comprises a single market to all export control regimes to be useful and necessary.
We increasingly regard the issue of non-strategic nuclear weapons as a priority, which needs to be addressed through the final fulfillment of the 1991 and 1992 Presidential Nuclear Initiatives known as PNIs. Verifiable reductions and ultimate elimination of these weapons, including through reciprocal, gradual, transparent and timely codification of PNIs, must be an integral part of the nuclear arms control and disarmament process.
Mr. President,
We reiterate our enduring commitment to the goal of general and complete disarmament and the world free of nuclear weapons. Until we reach this goal, effective measures related to nuclear arms control and further disarmament, especially reduction in the global stockpile of nuclear weapons, remain of utmost importance. The CTBT needs to be ratified, especially by the annex 2 States, so that it can enter into force, and negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty in the Conference on Disarmament started without further delay.
Lithuania strongly supports the efforts of the IAEA to improve effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system based on assessment of the correctness and completeness of the State's declarations to the IAEA concerning nuclear material and nuclear-related activities. Our country considers that the Additional Protocol together with the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement currently represent the verification standard which needs to be further strengthened, universalized and applied as a condition for nuclear material and technology supply.
We highly commend the states that have signed and ratified the Additional Protocols. Indeed, universalization of the Additional Protocol would not only reinforce non- proliferation regime, but also considerably increase confidence for international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and contribute to enhancing global security. Therefore, Lithuania encourages all States especially the ones currently operating nuclear power plants or planning to construct them in the future to undertake necessary steps to bring the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement into force as well as sign, ratify and implement the Additional Protocol.
We underline the key role that the IAEA plays in assisting Member States to develop and implement national and regional nuclear security frameworks. We call on countries which have not done so to adhere to and fully implement international instruments, such as the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities as well as the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources. We note with satisfaction a positive trend in participation in those instruments.
Mr. President,
In the near future Lithuania will face a rather challenging task related to nuclear power activities domestically and in the region. Therefore, for us it is extremely important to assure that all phases of new nuclear energy projects would be implemented in compliance with international legal instruments, safety and environmental standards, security guidelines and safeguards requirements. Final decisions regarding nuclear projects in our view should be made only after completion of consultations with neighboring countries and having fully evaluated potential risks. Transparency is critical for the public trust in the country embarking on or expanding peaceful nuclear program as well as for the trust and confidence of neighbouring countries.
Lithuania would like to stress a key role that the IAEA plays in reviewing and assessing safety and security of emerging nuclear sites as- well as providing assessment of readiness of the national nuclear infrastructure, maturity of the national regulatory system, safety culture, etc. We encourage countries, especially newcomers to the IAEA, to make use of the full range of Agency services.
We fully adhere to the principle that safety is a precondition for the responsible and sustainable use of nuclear technology and stands ready to share our experience in the field of nuclear safety, safeguards application, safe radioactive waste management and radiation protection.
Mr. President,
Finally, we welcome the contribution of civil society in promoting the principles and objectives of the NPT. The 2010 Review Conference should acknowledge this indispensable contribution and look for more effective interaction.
I thank you.















Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



