Mr. President, Distinguished Delegates,
First of all, I would like to start by wishing best success to Ambassador Duarte, recognizing the difficult task and great responsibility that await him. You may count, Mr. Ambassador, on the sincere support and co-operation of my delegation.
Lithuania fully aligns herself with the statement on behalf of the European Union, delivered by the distinguished Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg. 1 will limit myself to underscoring a few issues in my national capacity.
Mr. President,
A strong NPT is essential for non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament goals. NPT has endured many challenges. During the last five years, the non-proliferation regime has come under renewed strain of non-compliance. We are witnessing the controversy of withdrawal, clandestine proliferation, as well as a threat of nuclear terrorism. To respond to these new threats and challenges we should take concrete actions to strengthen the functioning of NPT and the non-proliferation regime in general.
States have the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear power, yet the exercise of this right must not be a carte blanche for abusing the letter and spirit of the NPT. This calls, as recognized in UN Secretary General's report "In Larger Freedom", for a stronger verification mechanism in the hands of the IAEA. Universalization of the Additional Protocol should become a verification standard and a condition of supply to all non-nuclear-weapons states.
After four years of implementation of the Additional Protocol, Lithuania stands ready to share its experience and to assist others in the process of embracing this vital commitment.
We strongly believe that states should not be able to withdraw from the Treaty and then continue to enjoy the benefits of nuclear technologies acquired under the NPT.
Multilateral export control regimes supported by robust national systems of export controls have become important tools in ensuring the implementation of Article III of the Treaty. They also provide a back-bone for effective responses to the threat of terrorism stemming from the proliferation of WMD, as recognized by UN Security Council Resolution 1540. It should be made clear that Resolution 1540 is not just another routine exercise - rather, implementation of the provisions of this Resolution requires serious and steady efforts.
Increased activities of black markets in sensitive nuclear materials, technology and equipment calls for additional efforts and strengthened export controls to stem proliferation and non-state actors' attempts to put their hands on radiological or nuclear devises. The Proliferation Security Initiative must be credited for marshalling political will and capabilities to significantly raise the bar for proliferators. Lithuania supports the PSI Interdiction principles, which gave a new impetus for enhanced international cooperation to prevent illegal transfers of nuclear material and equipment.
This Review Conference is expected to accord highest priority to developing strategies to deny terrorists access to nuclear materials. Thus, it is important to reach the expeditious agreement among State Parties on amending the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We also welcome the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Mr. President,
On December 31, 2004, Lithuania shut down the first RBMK type reactor of its Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. The second and last reactor is slated for shutdown by 2009. Decommissioning of this type of reactors represents an unprecedented challenge. It requires not only unique technical solutions, but also comes with a massive bill. I wish to take this opportunity to express appreciation for the commitment of the European Community and other donors to provide long term and adequate financial support. The success of the phasing out of Ignalina NPP depends on unfailing commitments from all our partners.
During the decommissioning Lithuania attaches special priority to safety and security measures in order to prevent any possibility for diversion of nuclear materials or equipment. Assisted by the International Atomic Energy Agency and other organizations, Lithuania has taken the necessary measures to improve the national physical protection system of radioactive materials. Actions were also taken in establishing the system for locating, securing and removing orphan sources.
Mr. President,
Lithuania regards commitments and decisions taken by past Review Conferences as remaining in effect. We look forward to this Review Conference to further building upon the established principle of "permanence with accountability" and, in particular, upon "13 steps'". Disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing.
Thus, further practical measures towards the goal of nuclear disarmament should be taken. Lithuania increasingly regards the issue of non-strategic nuclear weapons as a priority, which needs to be addressed through final fulfillment of the 1991 and 1992 Presidential Nuclear Initiatives. Verifiable reductions and ultimate elimination of these weapons, including through gradual and timely codification of PNIs, must be an integral part of the nuclear arms control and disarmament process. We also believe it is of crucial importance to reaffirm the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency.
Mr. President,
Lithuania submitted its national report on the NPT implementation that goes beyond the focus on Article VI and indeed covers all articles of the Treaty. We too would like to see a regular reporting of all states parties to become a permanent and standard practice.
In conclusion: It is imperative that we emerge from this Conference with the Treaty's integrity and political credibility strengthened, and with decisions aimed at overcoming the institutional deficit. We hope that we all will not only renew our commitments and obligations, but will reinforce them by taking concrete steps.
Thank you.
