Please check against delivery
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA, 23 APRIL 2013
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation wishes to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this Second
Preparatory Committee meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the NPT. The First
Prepcom in Vienna last year has helped us to lay the foundation for this current review
cycle. As we had stated last year, we wish to emphasise that this preparatory process is
our collective opportunity to not simply set the stage, but to set it positively and correctly -
to engage constructively and to push for tangible progress and results. This Prepcom
need to move the NPT process forward -to move towards the ultimate goal of eliminating
nuclear weapons and achieving general and complete disarmament In this regard, my
delegation extends its fullest co-operation to you in our efforts to ensure a successful
outcome of this meeting.
2. My delegation associates itself with the statement made by the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
3. Malaysia will continue to pursue for a nuclear-weapon-free world. Achieving this
rests on the fulfillment of the basic bargain embodied in the three Pillars of the NPT,
namely disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
Despite some progress, concerns still remain, such as, the slow progress in the reduction
of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons, lack of transparency, the high alert status
of nuclear weapons, and the continuing pursuit of nuclear programmes by a few countries
and the insistence of some others to remain outside the NPT.
4. Malaysia remains convinced that the total elimination of nuclear weapons should
remain on top of the international agenda. This ongoing 2015 NPT Review Conference
cycle serves as a good foundation for all States to substantiate their unequivocal
commitment to achieving the common goal of the elimination of nuclear weapons.
Malaysia looks forward to the Nuclear-Weapons States to fulfill their commitments to report
to the 2014 Prepcom on the steps that they are undertaking towards the elimination of
their nuclear weapons. This however does not preclude us from pursuing towards
negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention. 
5. The very existence of nuclear weapons is incompatible with humanity. Malaysia will
continue to table the resolution on the ICJ Advisory Opinion of the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons at the General Assembly this year, which was supported by an
overwhelming majority of Member States, including a few states with nuclear weapons.
The resolution, inter alia, continues to underscore the unanimous opinion of the Court that
there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international
control.
Mr. Chairman,
6. It is regrettable that the much anticipated Middle East Conference on a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) had not taken placed last year as what was
envisaged. Nonetheless, Malaysia wishes to emphasise the importance placed on the
NPT process should not be lessened by the fact that a Middle East Conference was not
held last year. Malaysia looks forward towards the convening of the Middle East
Conference on a zone free of WMDs as soon as possible.
7. Malaysia continues to value the NPT as, amongst others, a tool to ensure stability
and confidence. As such, while the Treaty allows, as any other international Treaty does,
for a Party to withdraw from it, any decision of withdrawal from the treaty should not be
made unilaterally, but in accordance to Article 10 of the NPT. The universalization of the
Treaty is a goal and principle that has to be further encouraged and pursued.
8. At the regional level, together with the other ASEAN Member Countries, Malaysia
looks forward to the Nuclear-Weapons States acceding to the Protocol to the Treaty on
the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ) at the earliest opportunity.
Malaysia welcomes the continued dialogue between the Nuclear-Weapons states and the
ASEAN Member Countries towards achieving a resolution on the outstanding issues.
Mr. Chairman,
9. In concluding, we must work towards a world without nuclear weapons. We should
never relent in our concerted campaign for nuclear disarmament. In this regard, my . -
delegation wishes to commend the supportive catalytic role played by nongovernmental
organizations. We believe that the inter-governmental process can derive tremendous
benefit from closer interaction and cooperation with such organizations.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 