..
MALAYSIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO TBE UNITED NATIONS
(Please check against delivery)
STATEMENT BY H.E. RAMLAN IBRAHIM
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE ON THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
NEW YORK, 30 APRIL 2015
Madam President,
On Malaysia's behalf, I wish to congratulate you on your election as President of this
Review Conference. I look forward to working with you and wish to assure you of my
support and that of my delegation. Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by Myanmar on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and by Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
2. My delegation also expresses our profound sadness and condolences to the
delegations of Nepal, India and Bangladesh, and to their Governments and peoples as
well as to the families affected by the earthquake.
Madam President,
3. Malaysia's participation in the 2015 Review Conference reflects our relentless
pursuit of a nuclear-weapon-free world. The destructive power of a nuclear weapon is
phenomenal, and it is unacceptable that there remain stockpiles of nuclear weapons of
amounts capable of destroying our world many times over. Malaysia remains convinced
that the NPT regime continues to occupy a role of central importance in efforts to halt
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, as well as being an essential foundation for the
pursuit of general and complete nuclear disarmament. Maintaining the NPT's integrity is
key to international peace and security. In this regard, Malaysia calls on NPT State
Parties to reaffirm and strengthen the three pillars of the Treaty.
4. In recent years, there have been initiatives outside the Treaty that has given
more focus, emphasis and effort towards achieving non-proliferation goals. While
Malaysia has been supportive of such initiatives, it is evident that the objectives of the
disarmament pillar of the Treaty have not been pursued with corresponding urgency,
particularly by the Nuclear-Weapons-States, whether inside or outside the NPT
framework.
5. This year marks the 20th anniversary since the infamous bargain of the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference was struck among States Parties of the NPT. In
313 East 43rd Street
New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 986 6310
Fax: (212) 490 8576
Email: mwnewyorkun@kln.gov.my
Website: www.un.int/malaysia 
1995 the non-nuclear weapons states had reaffirmed the decision to foreswear the
development or use of nuclear weapons, on the understanding that Nuclear-WeaponsStates
would accelerate the pace of their nuclear disarmament. Sadly, while we
acknowledge that some efforts have been taken in reducing the numbers of nuclear
weapons, the pace of disarmament is crawling slow rather than accelerated. NuclearWeapons-States
continue to harp the need to accelerate non-proliferation while ignoring
their obligations in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the Treaty. We urge
the Nuclear-Weapon States to accelerate their efforts towards achieving the objectives
of the disarmament pillar. Malaysia looks forward to the Nuclear-Weapons States
fulfilling their commitments to report to this Conference on the steps that they are
undertaking towards this end, as agreed under the 2010 NPT Review Conference
Action Plan.
6. Malaysia remains firm in its conviction that nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation are two sides of the same coin. In this regard, if the international
community is serious in wanting to curtail the proliferation of nuclear weapons, it must
also be prepared to accept the obligations on nuclear disarmament. We are concerned
that this perennial imbalance may soon lead to a situation where non-proliferation noncompliance
exists as a result of disarmament non-compliance. As such, Malaysia
reiterates our call on all NPT States Parties to continue to ensure the implementation of
the three pillars, in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner. Towards this end, my
delegation is also of the view that the provisions of negative security assurances for
Non-Nuclear-Weapons-States are important and achievable steps towards nuclear nonproliferation
and nuclear disarmament.
Madam President,
7. Malaysia welcomes the outcome of the discussion at the previous Nayarit, Oslo
and Vienna Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons. Malaysia is
deeply encouraged by the growing support on the humanitarian dimension of nuclear
disarmament. The recognition among governments of the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons is a positive development which cannot be ignored
nor be denied. This must now be translated into meaningful action towards a treaty to
outlaw and eliminate nuclear weapons. Malaysia firmly believes that the humanitarian
approach would contribute towards broadening the international discourse on nuclear
disarmament, and is ready to work with other Member States on any proposal with the
ultimate aim of total elimination of nuclear weapons.
8. Malaysia also welcomes the framework agreement on Iran's nuclear programme
concluded between the P5+1 (China, France, Russia, UK, US and Germany) and Iran
on 2 April 2015 in Lausanne, Switzerland, which constitutes an important development
in efforts to promote peace, security and stability in the world. The commitment and
flexibility shown by all parties in reaching an initial agreement is a positive step towards
nuclear security, particularly in view of the lengthy and difficult negotiations since 2006.
2 
9. Malaysia believes that the agreement reached will contribute to efforts to
eliminate the threat of weapons of mass destruction, and hopes that the deal will pave
the way for both sides to continue to work towards reaching a long-term comprehensive
solution.
Madam President,
10. Malaysia believes in the strengthening of existing nuclear-weapon-free-zones,
and the establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free-zones represent a positive step
towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament. In this regard, Malaysia
wishes to highlight that 2015 is a critical year for ASEAN with the realisation of the
ASEAN Community and the 20th anniversary of the signing of the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ) Treaty. As the current Chair of ASEAN,
Malaysia has submitted a memorandum on the activities of the SEANWFZ Treaty, for
the consideration of this Conference. ASEAN hopes to seize upon the momentum of the
continued interest of the NWS to sign the Protocol.
11. Ideally, Malaysia believes that the Nuclear Weapons States should accede to the
Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty without reservations, and that ASEAN should
continue to encourage the NWS to do so. However, bearing in mind that the inclusion of
a statement has been the practice with other nuclear-free zone treaties, there is a need
for ASEAN to also look at the reservations put forth by the NWS to determine whether
they are logical and reasonable, and that these reservations do not run counter to the
Treaty.
12. Malaysia also remains concerned on the danger of nuclear proliferation in the
Middle East. We lament the fact that a nuclear weapons-free-zone has yet to be
established in that region. Malaysia believes that the establishment of nuclear weaponsfree-zone
will enhance global and regional peace and strengthen WMD non-proliferation
among all Middle-Eastern countries. My delegation joins the call for the establishment of
nuclear weapons-free-zone in the region without delay. In this regard, Malaysia calls for
the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East, and urges for the
Conference on establishing a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East to be convened as soon as possible.
Madam President,
13. Malaysia reaffirms its full confidence in the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), in discharging its duties and responsibilities in an impartial, effective and
professional manner. The IAEA should continue its commendable work in realizing the
full potential of peaceful applications of nuclear technology for the benefit of all.
Malaysia reaffirms the centrality of the Agency's role with regard to issues relating to
nuclear safeguards and verifications. Malaysia believes that the IAEA should be
afforded the time and space to conduct such activities within its mandate independently.
3 
14. My delegation also wishes to reaffirm the understanding that Article IV of the
Treaty vests States Parties with the inalienable right to develop research, production
and use of nuclear energy as well as the right to participate to the fullest possible
exchange of equipment, materials and technology for peaceful purposes, in conformity
with respective safeguard agreements. In this regard, Malaysia remains perplexed why
States outside of the NPT have enjoyed such rights. The international community,
particularly States Parties to the Treaty, should live up to its obligations in upholding
principles of transparency and non-discrimination in the implementation of the Treaty.
Selectivity and discrimination would only serve to undermine the Treaty.
Madam President,
15. In concluding, let me reiterate Malaysia's unwavering commitments to fulfil our
obligations under the NPT. My country looks forward to partiCipating actively in this
session, for a successful 2015 Review Conference and hopefully for a world free from
nuclear weapons.
Thank you.
4 