Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the delegation of Malaysia, I wish to congratulate you on your election as the Chair of the Second Session of the Preparatoiy Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. My delegation wishes to associate itself with the statement made by the delegation of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) States Parties to the NPT.
2.	Malaysia views with some satisfaction the outcome of the 2007 session of the Preparatory Committee. We managed to resolve the procedural issues; we should now focus on substantive discussions. The road ahead is still unclear and fraught with difficulties. In this regard, our gathering here today in Geneva is an affirmation of our commitment to achieve a diplomatic and multilaterally negotiated resolution to the host of issues concerning nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, my delegation does not see a dichotomy between pursuing the aims of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, since they are both inter-related and mutually reinforcing. Only through the total elimination of nuclear weapons, can we eliminate the threat of the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
3.	In line with our commitment with the NPT review process, Malaysia wishes to share with NPT States Parties that it has ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban-Treaty (CTBT) this year on January 17th and together with Barbados and Colombia, the number of CTBT signatories to date have increased to 178, bringing the treaty ever closer to achieving universality. Malaysia urges those States, particularly those listed under Annex 2 of the CTBT, whose signatures and ratifications are necessary for entry-into-force of that treaty, to do so at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. Chairman,
4.	We can ill afford another failed NPT Review Conference. At this session of the Preparatory Committee, we should build upon past understandings achieved, in particular the outcomes of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the 2000 NPT Review Conference, and proceed with substantive discussion to ensure that the 2010 NPT Review Conference would produce tangible results. Our discussion here should contribute to enhancing the safety and security of the world's peoples from the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and to promote the potential of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to be fully harnessed for the benefit of all. We do not have another forum to address these pressing issues, apart from the NPT. We also like to see progress at the Conference on Disarmament particularly with regard to the establishment of an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament; commencement
of negotiations on a phased programme of nuclear disarmament; and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time, including conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention.
5.	Malaysia also believes that our discussions should also focus on ways to universalize the NPT. In this regard, we wish to reiterate the call for States remaining outside the NPT regime to accede to the treaty as non-nuclear weapon States. In particular, States Parties should urge Israel, being the only non-signatoiy to the NPT in the Middle East, to immediately accede to the Treaty. Israel's possession of nuclear weapons has heightened the insecurity and volatility in the Middle East. Israel's accession to the NPT would enhance peace and security in the region, and the world.
6.	In the interim and pending Israel's accession to the NPT, it is important for the nuclear weapons states to immediately and unconditionally halt the transfer of relevant nuclear weapons, materials, goods and technology to Israel. Malaysia is disappointed with the selectivity and double standards manifested in the practice of turning a blind eye to Israel's possession of nuclear weapons. Such cases whereby a State not party to the NPT is accorded preferential treatment constitutes a gross violation of the spirit and letter of the Treaty, since the transfer of such nuclear materials, technology and know-how to NPT non-states parties could be diverted towards the development of nuclear weapons. If NPT States Parties are serious in achieving the goal of universalizing the Treaty, they should call for a total and complete prohibition on the transfer of all nuclear related materials, resources, and assistance, and on cooperation in nuclear scientific or technological fields to non-states parties, without exception.
7.	Malaysia strongly believes in the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones (NWFZ) for the promotion of regional disarmament to enhance international peace and security. At the regional level, Malaysia urges the nuclear-weapon States to become parties to the Protocol of the South-East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANFZ) at the earliest opportunity. Accession to the Protocol by the nuclear-weapon States would effectively accord a negative security assurance to the regional States Parties and create the conducive conditions for durable peace and security, as well as promote the building of confidence in the region.
8.	Malaysia lauds the progress of the nuclear weapons states in continuing to reduce the numbers of their nuclear weapons stockpiles and fissile materials stockpiles. However, they should not be undertaken in parallel with efforts to improve the efficiency of such weapons. In this regard, these measures are no substitute for the effective and complete elimination of nuclear weapons, the only guarantee against its use or threat of use. Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, efforts for the conclusion of a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear weapon States parties to the Treaty should be undertaken as a matter of priority.
Mr. Chairman,
9.	Malaysia reaffirms its full confidence in the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the abilities of its Director-General in discharging their duties and responsibilities in an impartial, effective and professional manner. Malaysia fully supports and reaffirms the centrality of the Agency's role on issues relating to
nuclear safeguards and verifications. The Agency should be afforded the necessary time and space to conduct those activities within its mandate as the sole verification agency of the NPT, without undue interference. We should not politicize outstanding issues which the IAEA are currently seized of, as there are technical and legal means to resolve them. Among States Parties, there should be a spirit of cooperation and dialogue to address the issue of compliance with obligations under the NPT, which ultimately should be aimed to advance the nuclear disarmament agenda in line with Article VI of the NPT.
10.	Malaysia shares the view that peaceful uses of nuclear technology can play a decisive role, particularly in contributing towards socio-economic growth and development in developing countries, leading to greater prosperity for all mankind. In this regard, Malaysia notes that of late, there appears to be an increasing trend towards bilateral cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy between the more advanced nuclear powers and several less advanced countries. In principle, Malaysia has no difficulty and is in fact supportive of such cooperation as we view it as being entirely consistent with Articles IV and V of the NPT. However, Malaysia would argue that the international community should live up to its obligations in upholding principles of transparency and non-discrimination to ensure that all can benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. We reaffirm the role of the IAEA particularly in terms of ensuring that the peaceful uses of nuclear technology are shared in a transparent, non-selective and non-discriminatory manner. In this context, discussion at the IAEA on multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should continue with the aim of creating a fair, non-discriminatoiy international system to ensure that all States who so wish to have access to nuclear fuel.
Mr. Chairman,
11.	In concluding, I underline my delegation's readiness to work with you and other parties to achieve a positive and successful outcome at this session of the Preparatory Committee, contributing towards attaining the objectives of the Treaty particularly in laying the foundations for a world free from nuclear weapons.
Thank you.