Please check against delivery
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR DATO' MUHAMMAD SHAHRUL IKRAM YAAKOB
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS, VIENNA
AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE
FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS, VIENNA, 30 APRIL - 11 MAY, 2012
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation congratulates you on your election as Chairman of this First Preparatory
Committee meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the NPT. We attach great
importance to this session of the Preparatory Committee as it would lay the foundation for
a successful Review Conference three years from now. This is our collective opportunity
to not simply set the stage, but to set it positively and correctly - to engage constructively
and to push for tangible progress. We need to move the process forward, given that the
NPT is the single most important tool to achieve the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear
weapons and achieving general and complete disarmament. In this regard, my delegation
extends its fullest co-operation to you in your efforts to ensure a successful outcome of
this meeting. My delegation would also like to express its appreciation to Ambassador
Libran Cabactulan, the President of the 2012 Review Conference for his opening remarks
and his leadership as President of the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
2. My delegation associates itself fully with the statement delivered earlier by Ambassador
Ahmad Fathalla, First Under Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Egypt, on behalf the of the NonAligned
Movement States Parties to the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
3. Malaysia remains convinced that total elimination of nuclear weapons should
remain on top of the list of the international agenda. Achieving a world free of nuclear 
Please check against delivery
weapons rests on the fulfilment of the basic bargain embodied in the 3 Pillars of the NPT,
namely disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
Despite some progress, concerns still remain such as the slow progress in the reduction of
strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons, lack of transparency, the high alert status of
nuclear weapons, and the continuing pursuit of nuclear programmes by a few countries
and the insistence of some others to remain outside the NPT.
4. Recent NPT progress has been mixed. The 2010 Review Conference managed to
adopt a consensus final document that was neither a complete rollback nor just a lowest
common denominator outcome. Nonetheless, the 201 0 Final Document provides room for
optimism since it also affords us with a timeline concerning the implementation of a
number of actions. Its full implementation is required. It is the belief of my delegation that
this Preparatory Committee Process would serve as a good avenue for all the nuclearweapon
States to substantiate their unequivocal commitment to eliminate their nuclear
arsenals and provide positive momentum as we move towards the 2015 RevCon.
5. The very existence of nuclear weapons is incompatible with elementary
considerations of humanity. It is in this regard that we have joined the statement on the
"Humanitarian Narrative1' that will be (delivered later on by Switzerland). Additionally, we
have continued to introduce the resolution on the ICJ Advisory Opinion of the Legality of
the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons at the General Assembly, which was supported by
an overwhelming majority of Member States, including a few states with nuclear weapons.
The resolution, inter alia, continues to underscore the unanimous opinion of the Court that
there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international
control.
Mr. Chairman,
6. We consider the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a primary
disarmament instrument and commended the recent ratification of the CTBT by Indonesia
and Guatemala. We call upon all States to work towards the entry into force of the CTBT,
particularly those states listed under Annex 2 whose signature and ratification of the CTBT
is necessary for the Treaty's entry into force. 
Please check against delivery
7. At the regional level, Malaysia is party to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ). Together with other ASEAN Member States, we look forward to
the signing of the Protocol of the Treaty by the nuclear-weapon States at the earliest possible
date. Malaysia also supports the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of all weapons of
mass destruction. We hope that the convening of the 2012 Conference in Finland will provide the
necessary impetus to the creation of such zone in the Middle East.
8. At the national level, I wish to highlight some of the following:
8.1 We are improving our legislative framework, and are currently in the final stages of
revising our Atomic Energy Licensing Act to become a comprehensive nuclear law.
This would allow Malaysia to accede to the Convention on Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and its 2005 Protocol; ratify the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and the IAEA Additional Protocol, and
adopt the various outstanding IAEA Codes of Conduct. Additionally, we had
submitted our Initial Declaration in Preparation to Ratify the AP in December 201 1;
8.2 We have also endorsed the IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of
Radioactive Sources, the Guidance on the Import and Export of Radioactive
Sources, as well as IAEA recommendations on the physical protection of nuclear
material and nuclear facilities: and
8.3 We continue to strengthen the global export control regime. Since 1 July
201 1, our Strategic Trade Act has been enforced, and this law has enabled
us to further contribute to global efforts to curb the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
my delegation wishes to commend the supportive catalytic role played by non-governmental
organizations. We believe that we can derive tremendous benefit through the inter-governmental
process and from closer interaction and cooperation with such organizations.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 