Please check against delivery 

STATEMENT BY H.E. MUHAMMAD SHAHRUL IKRAM YAAKOB PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK 
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS GENEVA, 23 APRIL 2018 
Mr. Chairman, 
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the NPT. My delegation stands ready to participate actively in the work of this preparatory committee, in laying the necessary foundation for a successful 2020 Review Cycle. 
2. Malaysia associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the Treaty. 
Mr. Chairman, 
3. The world today has never been more advanced, globalized and dynamic. And yet the survival of humanity today remains under severe threat from the existence and use of weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. As we gather here today, thousands of nuclear weapons continue to exist and the potential for use, accidents or proliferation remains. 
4. As such, effective measures of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation should be our highest priority. The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime, which requires all its States Parties to implement the Treaty in a full, objective and balanced manner across its three pillars — nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
1 

Mr. Chairman, 
5. Malaysia believes that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing and are essential for strengthening international peace and security. 
6. All States have an obligation to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to nuclear disarmament under strict control in a verifiable, irreversible and transparent manner, as outlined in Article VI of the NPT. 
7. At the same time, non-proliferation derives its legitimacy from the larger objective of nuclear disarmament. Pursuing non-proliferation alone while ignoring nuclear disarmament obligations is both counterproductive and unsustainable. 
Mr. Chairman, 
8. We stress that the purpose of the NPT is not only about preventing Non-Nuclear Weapon States from acquiring nuclear weapons, but it is also about disarming Nuclear Weapon States. The extension of the Treaty does not imply indefinite possession of nuclear arsenals by the Nuclear Weapon States, for such assumption is incompatible with the objective and purpose of the Treaty. 
9. Let us remain cognizant of the humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament. We must give due consideration to humanitarian consequences of a nuclear weapon explosion as the risks associated with nuclear weapons concern the security of all humanity. As such, all States in possession of nuclear weapons should make every effort to maintain the non-use of such weapons at all costs. 
Mr. Chairman, 
10. Malaysia has joined 58 other UN Member States in signing the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW). We are convinced that the political and legal impact of this Treaty will steer the international community collectively towards the elimination of nuclear weapons and the maintenance of a world free of nuclear weapons. The instrument is legally sound, feasible to implement and one that sends a powerful political message that nuclear weapons are categorically unacceptable. Thus, we strongly call on UN Member States that have yet to do so, to sign the Treaty and work together towards its entry into force. 
11. Malaysia also stresses the significance of achieving universal adherence to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), including by all Nuclear Weapon States. If the objectives of the CTBT were to be fully realized, the continued commitment of all States signatories, especially the Nuclear Weapon States, towards nuclear disarmament would be essential. 
2 

12. Pending the CTBT's entry into force, we strongly call for the immediate and unconditional cessation of all nuclear weapon tests and complete prohibition of nuclear weapons research and development, putting an end to conducting nuclear weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions, or nuclear weapon tests in alternative ways, as well as the use of new technologies for upgrading existing nuclear weapons systems. 
Mr. Chairman, 
13. Malaysia fully recognizes that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), an independent intergovernmental, science and technology-based organization, is the sole competent authority responsible for verification of the fulfillment of safeguard obligations assumed by States Parties under the NPT, with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, as well as the global focal point for nuclear technical cooperation. 
14. Malaysia believes that nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs) strengthen peace and security as they promote greater transparency and dialogue among States regionally, and obliquely reduce the risk of regional tensions and conflicts. We believe it is essential that Nuclear Weapon States provide unconditional assurances against use or threat of use of nuclear weapons to all States within NWFZs. 
15. On this note, Malaysia is firmly committed to the full and effective implementation of the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) or Bangkok Treaty. We believe in the value of engagement, to resolve all outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives and principles of SEANWFZ. 
16. Malaysia calls upon the Nuclear Weapon States to ratify related protocols to all treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, withdraw any reservations or interpretative declarations incompatible with their object and purpose, and respect the denuclearization status of these zones. 
17. In this context, Malaysia strongly supports the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and calls for the full implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, which is an integral and essential part of the package of decisions reached without a vote that enabled the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995. The resolution remains valid until its objectives are achieved. 
Mr. Chairman, 
18. In conclusion, let us be resolute in fulfilling our collective obligations, honouring our commitments and striving for progress through this august platform of the 2nd Preparatory Committee. Malaysia stands ready to work closely with all States Parties in this endeavour of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, towards creating a peaceful world, free of nuclear weapons. 
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
3 

