Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the delegation of Malaysia, I wish to extend our warmest congratulations and felicitations to you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of the First Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We are confident that with your leadership, diplomatic skills as well as vast knowledge and experience in issues relating to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, you will be able to guide the Preparatory Committee towards a successful outcome. In this regard, rest assured Mr. Chairman, the Malaysian delegation stands ready to fully cooperate with you. We also wish to take this opportunity to thank the Federal Government of Austria for kindly hosting the First Preparatory Committee Meeting and for the warm nospitality accorded to my delegation.
2.	Bearing in mind that this is the First Meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference since the disappointing conclusion of the 2005 Review Conference, I feel there is little need for me to restate the difficulties that we face in realizing the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda in the context of the multilateral framework. In this connection, my delegation hopes that at this Meeting, which will lay the groundwork for the 2010 NPT Review Conference, all States Parties could find agreement and not repeat history.
3.	Such understanding would enable us to move on and focus our efforts on substantive work. Rather than allowing past disappointments to loom large over us. we should strengthen our resolve and proactively work towards reinvigorating the multilateral process in pursuing the aims of complete and general disarmament, of which nuclear disarmament constitutes a primary objective.
4.	At this juncture, my delegation wishes to associate itself fully with the statement made by the delegation of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) States Parties to the NPT.
5.	My delegation also wishes to extend its congratulations to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the occasion of its 50th anniversary. It is a happy and auspicious coincidence indeed that the Preparatory Committee has been convened in the beautiful city of Vienna for the first time.
Mr. Chairman,
6.	Malaysia is greatly appreciative of the developmental role that ihe IAEA has played since its establishment, particularly in assisting the developing States Parties to the Treaty in planning for and in the use of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes.
7.	In this regard, Malaysia reaffirms its full confidence in the abilities of the Director General and the Agency in discharging their duties and responsibilities in an impartial, effective and professional manner. Malaysia believes that tne IAEA snould continue its commendable work in realizing the full potential of peaceful applications of nuclear technology for the benefit of all humankind. On a related note, Malaysia is fully supportive of, and would reaffirm the centrality of the Agency's roie with regard to issues relating to nuclear safeguards and verifications. In that regard, Malaysia believes that the Agency should be afforded the necessary time and space to conduct those activities within its mandate as the sole verification agency of the NPT without undue interference.
8.	My delegation also wishes to reaffirm the understanding that Article !V of the Treaty vests States Parties, particularly the Non-Nuclear Weapons States (NNWS), with the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuciear energy! as well as the right to participate in the fullest possible exchange of equipment! materials and technology for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with their respective safeguards agreements.
9.	In the same breath, Malaysia wishes to express its concern over the practice of selectivity and discrimination as well as the trend towards unilateralism in dictating the limits of research, production and use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. In this regard, Malaysia would argue that the international community should live up to its obligations in upholding principles of transparency and non-discrimination to ensure that all can benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear technology.
Mr. Chairman,
10.	Malaysia strongly believes that despite previous setbacks, the NPT regime continues to occupy a role of central importance in efforts to halt the vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons, as well as being an essential foundation for the pursuit of total nuclear disarmament. In this connection, my delegation would reaffirm the understanding that the 3 Pillars of the NPT, namely disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear technology are closely intertwined and mutually reinforcing elements which, taken together, form the bulwark of the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. As such, my delegation would take this opportunity to reiterate the call on ail States Parties to the Treaty to continue to work together to find ways in which to ensure their effective implementation m a balanced, non-discriminatory and mutually beneficial manner.
11.	In reiterating the call for complete and total nuclear disarmament, my delegation wishes to share its views on recent reports concerning the development of new, more sophisticated breed of nuclear weapons. Equally disturbing are recent announcements proclaiming new strategic defense doctrines, including the announcements relating to the qualitative improvement of existing nuclear arsenals by the weapon States that in effect, set out the rationale for first use of nuclear weapons, and lower the threshold for the use of nuclear weapons.
12.	With regard to these developments, it appears as if some States have disregarded their obligations or are selectively implementing provisions of the NPT, and this has led to a situation that places not only the NPT regime at risk. Put more importantly, humanity as well. These developments highlight the fact that commitments hitherto agreed upon are being unilaterally reinterpreted, and such retrogressive movements reinforces the untenable perception that the existence of nuclear weapons is essential for the maintenance of peace and security. Malaysia is of the view that such actions, if undertaken, could derail efforts aimed at achieving the goals of nuciear disarmament.
13.	It is worth recalling that under the terms of the bargain struck among the States Parties during the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the non-weapon States, in particular, had reaffirmed their decision to foreswear the use of nuciear weapons, on the understanding that the weapon States would accelerate the pace of their nuclear disarmament efforts. Sadly, more than ten years later, we are now witnessing a reversal of sorts. In particular, there is now a strong perception, more so in the developing world, that pressure is steadily applied on them to abide by the requirements of the non-proliferation pillar of the NPT, and that such pressure is not
accompanied by a similar drive by the weapon-States towards achieving the objectives of the disarmament pillar.
14.	In this connection, my delegation would reiterate the call for the full implementation of the unequivocal undertakings by nuclear weapons states at the 2000 NPT Review Conference to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament, in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the Treaty. Towards this end, my delegation views the provision of negative security assurances as an important and achievable step towards nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
15.	Malaysia is of the view that one practical and achievable way with which to address the issue of negative security assurances is through the establishment of nuclear weapons-free-zones. In this regard, Malaysia commends the Central Asian States and welcomes the establishment of a nuclear weapons-free-zone in that region. On another note, in view of the increasing volatility that we are currently witnessing in the Middle East, Malaysia laments the fact that a nuclear weapons-free-zone has yet to be established in that region and my delegation joins the call for the establishment of a nuclear weapons-free-zone in that region without delay.
16.	In this context, Malaysia reiterates the call on Israel, being the only non-signatory to the NPT in the Middle East, to immediately accede to the Treaty. Malaysia is of the view that such action on Israel's part would be an important confidence building measure and would significantly contribute to enhancing peace and security in the region. In this regard, Malaysia is disappointed with the selectivity and double standards practiced in turning a blind eye to Israel's open admission that it is in possession of nuclear weapons, which is a continuing cause for concern in an already volatile and unstable region.
17.	Pending Israel's accession to the Treaty, Malaysia would call upon the weapons States to immediately and unconditionally halt the transfer of relevant nuclear weapons, materials, goods and technology to that country. Malaysia is of tne view that such cases whereby a non-party is accorded preferential treatment in comparison to States Parties, constitutes a gross violation of the spirit and letter of the Treaty. Furthermore, in view of the dire situation in the Middle East, it is important that the international community urgently demand that Israel immediately eliminate its nuclear arsenals.
18.	Along similar lines, Malaysia is also concerned that access by certain States not party to the NPT to nuclear materials, technology and know-how that could be diverted to the development of nuclear weapons, is being facilitated by certain nuclear-weapon States. In this regard, if States Parties are serious in achieving the goal of universalising the Treaty, they would join Malaysia in calling for a total and complete prohibition on the transfer of all nuclear related materials, resources, assistance and cooperation in nuclear scientific or technological fields to States non-parties to the Treaty, without exception.
Mr. Chairman,
19.	While Malaysia believes that the strengthening of existing nuclear-weapon-free zones and establishment of new zones represents a positive step towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament. Although highly important and worthwhile, such steps are not the main prescription in achieving that goal. Malaysia remains firm
SaEaaBSFng55S35
proliferation. Mr. Chairman,
20.	On a lighter note, , ar.pleased,o an nounce that ^^^CSSSS
Nation on the elements of a draft Nuclear Weapons Conventon. which is envisioned as a means of further strengthening the NPT regime.
21.	Incidentally, the launch of the book coincides with the launching of a global grassroots educational campaign, known as the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons (ICAN). The campaign is spearheaded by NGOs including among others, IPPNW, INESAP, IALANA and the Hiroshima-based Mayors for Peace with
 educating 	feasibility of abiding
Thank you.