PER.\IAi'IIENT 'IISSION OFTH[ REPUBLIC OFTHE ~IARSHALL ISLANDS
TO THE UI'ITED I'ATIONS
New York
HOIl. !\Ir. Tony deBrum
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Republic of the Marshall Islands
91b Re\'iew Conference of the States Parties to the
Treat)' on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear " 'capons
General Debate
27 April 2015
Mr. Secretary-General, Madame President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen -
For far too many years, these circular negotiations on nuclear non-proliferation have failed to listen
closely to those voices who know better. There are several nations and peoples in the world who have
experienced nuclear weapons directly - and the Marshall Islands stands among them in close solidarity.
In particular. many Hibakusha have traveled from Japan to this meeting to ensure global decisionmakers
hear their powerful message.
How many in this room have personally witnessed nuclear weapon detonations?
I have - as a young boy at Likiep atoll in the northern Marshall Islands, during the time in which 67
nuclear weapons were tested between 1946 and 1958 - at an explosive scale equivalent tol.6
Hiroshima Shots every single day. for 12 years.
When 1 was nine years old, I remember well the 1954 Bravo shot at Bikini atoIl - the largest detonation
the world had ever seen, toDD times the power of the Hiroshima blast. It was the morning, and I was
fishing with my grandfather. He was throwing the net and suddenly the silent bright flash - and then a
force, the shock wave. Everything turned red - the ocean, the fish, the sky, and my grandfather's net.
And we were 200 miles away from ground zero. A memory that can never be erased.
These nuclear tests were conducted during the Marshall Islands time as a United Kations Trust
Territory - and many of these actions were taken, despite Marshallese objections, under UN
Trusteeship Resolutions 1082 and 1493. adopted in 1954 and 1956. Those resolutions remain the only
specific instances in which the United Nations has ever explicitly authorized the use of nuclear
weapons.
Nuclear weapons tests have created lasting impacts in the Marshall Islands - not only a historical
reality but a contemporary struggle for our basic human rights - but I have not traveled to the NPT
meeting to air out any differences with our former administering authority. the United States. The facts
speak for themselves. Instead, I bring with me this moral lesson for all nations· because no one ever 
considered the humanitarian impacts of nuclear weapons, the Marshallese people still carry a burden
which no other people or nation should ever have to bear. And this is a burden we will carry for
generations to come.
The serious shortfalls in the NPT's implementation are not only legal gaps, but also a failure to address
the incontrovertible human fights clarified by the recent outcomes of the Conferences on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in Norway, Mexico and Austria. Over 150 nations,
including the Republic of the Marshall Islands, have joined the Statement on the Humanitarian
Consequences of Nuclear Weapons at the UN General Assembly's First Committee. An overwhelming
global majority agrees that the humanitarian dimension of disannament must be the strongest
centerpiece of multilateral assurance.
It should be our collective goal to not only stop the spread of nuclear weapons. but also to truly achieve
the peace and security of a world without them, and thus end the cycle of broken promises. This is why
the Marshall Islands serves a co-agent in action presently before the International Court of Justice,
which has brought this matter to the direct attention of the world's nuclear powers. After decades of
diplomacy, the PI's defining purpose remains unfulfilled, and those who are unwilling to negotiate in
good faith will be held to wider account.
Still, there is hope - the Republic of the Marshall Islands lends it's support to the recent outcomes,
driven by the United States and the "P5 plus I," that opens doors towards a framework approach
which will prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons. These negotiations are far from final - but if
they are completed, the international community will have proven that multilateral negotiation can still
yield positive steps towards averting nuclear danger.
If only such resolve was carried into the NPT. It is true that the world has slowly reduced the number
of nuclear weapons. But no one can keep a straight face and argue that sixteen thousand nuclear
weapons are an appropriate threshold for global safety. We are seeing nuclear nations modernize and
rebuild when they could use the opportunity to reduce. There is no right to "indefinite possession" to
continue to retain nuclear weapons on security grounds.
At this year's meeting, we need to address legal approaches capable of achieving "effective measures"
on disannament - and if that means a new legal framework towards the time bound elimination of
weapons and risks. with good-faith parameters rather than loopholes, and with meaningful participation
from al1 necessary nuclear actors - then the Marshall Islands is all for it.
The 20 I 0 NPT action plan is un important benchmark but it reveals serious shortcomings in
implementation - which cannot merely be "rolled over" without consequence. The valid right
of NPT Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only exists with the highest standards of
safety and security - and NPT States must be held to full account for violations or abusing withdrawal
provisions. 
We should further affinn that the Test Ban Treaty is vital to the NPT, recognizing that it's entry into
force is essential. The Marshall Islands' own direct experience should be lesson enough for the world
to firmly commit to ending nuclear testing.
Further, all relevanl States Parties should take necessary measures to bring abollt entry into force of
agreements establishing nuclear-free weapons zones. In particular, the support of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands for a nuclear-free Pacific has long been clouded by other agreements, and we are
encouraged that the United States has provided a new perspective on the Rarotonga Treaty's Protocols.
We express again our aspirations to join \vith our Pacific neighbors.
Madame President.
There may be different avenues towards on achieving a world without nuclear weapons - but our worst
fear is merely continuing the staniS quo - seeing no meaningful answer at all. Perpetuating the status
quo, paning ourselves on the back and expecting accolades for making zero progress at this NPT
Review Conference is totally unacceptable to all peoples and all nations. Surely we can, and must do
better. 