Mr. President,
On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Mauritius, let me congratulate you on your unanimous election as President of the 2005 Review Conference. We are confident that with your diplomatic skills and your longstanding experience in issues related to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, you will be able to guide the Conference to a successful outcome. We also wish to reassure you of the full support of our delegation in your endeavour.
The Republic of Mauritius aligns itself with the Statement made by the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement on Monday 2 May 2005.
My Delegation wishes to recognize the important contribution that the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has made to the maintenance of international peace and security since its entry into force in 1970. My own country became party to the NPT Treaty in 1968. On 9 December 2004, the Republic of Mauritius signed the IAEA Additional Protocol, demonstrating once again its full commitment to the non- proliferation and global disarmament agenda.
Mr. President,
My delegation believes that while proliferation is becoming a matter of grave concern in view of the threat to international peace and security, we should not lose sight of our ultimate objective which is the total elimination of all nuclear weapons. In this respect, there is a need for progress towards nuclear disarmament in line with Article VI of the NPT. My delegation is convinced that effective disarmament and arms control particularly in the nuclear field is essential for the prevention of a nuclear war, the strengthening of international peace and security and above all for the pursuit of economic and social advancement.
The NPT rests fundamentally on the essential framework of the three pillars, non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Implementation of the Treaty in a balanced manner by Member-States rests further on the recognition of the interconnectedness between the three pillars. However, it is evident to note that here has been selective or uneven implementation of its NPT provisions. Non- proliferation appears to have been placed at a higher level of priority at the expense of the other two pillars and such a situation is leading to an erosion of confidence in the NPT.
My delegation would like to register its concerns about lack of progress towards nuclear disarmament. Planned development of new types of Nuclear weapon systems and declared qualitative improvement in nuclear weapon technology is an indication of the resumption of a nuclear arms race among the Nuclear Weapons States. Already as per latest figures the existing warheads are estimated to upwards of 30,000 and current stock of fissile material would be sufficient enough to produce thousands more nuclear warheads. Such a situation is dreadfully dangerous and is against the spirit and letter of the NPT.
My delegation wishes to underscore the need for Nuclear Weapon States to provide Non -Nuclear Weapon States with effective guarantees that they will not use or threaten to use force against them. Codification of these assurances in legally binding instruments will contribute significantly as a vital confidence building measure and contribute towards diminishing the propensity of NNWS to acquire nuclear weapons.
Legally binding security guarantees are provided for in the Protocols to the Treaties establishing Nuclear Weapon Free Zones. We also subscribe to the advisory opinion of the ICJ of 8 July 1996 on the "Legality of threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons" which concluded inter alia that "there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control".
Lack of progress in the Conference on Disarmament has over the years purported to reinforce a feeling of skepticism among the NNWS about the commitment of the Nuclear Weapons States to nuclear disarmament. A renewed effort should be made by all countries to recommit themselves to the principles and objectives they agreed to in the NPT in 1970 as well as to the new determination expressed in the Millennium Declaration.
In respect of the Fissile Material Cut Off Treaty (FMCT), it is my delegation's belief that such a Treaty could serve both as a disarmament and non-proliferation tool. We therefore call for negotiations to start as early as possible on a non-discriminatory, multilateral, internationally and effective verifiable treaty, negotiated under the auspices of the Conference on Disarmament, banning production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices. Such an initiative would provide the necessary catalyst to kick-start the process of nuclear disarmament among Nuclear Weapon States. At the same time, it would provide security guarantees to Non-Nuclear Weapon States.
Mr. President,
Of equal importance is to ensure that nuclear weapons and materials do not fall in the wrong hands and those of terrorists. The presence of illicit trade in highly sensitive nuclear equipment and material makes it imperative to reinforce efforts to tackle illicit trafficking and procurement networks. We welcome the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism last month by the General Assembly which is expected to address nuclear terrorism in all its aspects. In addition it is important to enhance cooperation among States to strengthen regional and national capacities in order to ensure that deadly nuclear materials and arms do not fall in wrong hands.
The importance of the peaceful uses of nuclear science in support of economic, scientific and technological development of States cannot be underestimated. Nuclear science is playing a key role in economic and social development The application of nuclear science for peaceful uses is manifold, for instance in the field of medicine, in agriculture for the promotion of high yield- disease resistant crops, to manage water resource and in enhancing industrial productivity. Nuclear energy is producing 16% of the world's electricity in 30 countries. We believe in the inalienable right of the States Parties to the NPT to engage in research, production and use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes without discrimination and the non discriminatory transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes must be ensured. When the Founding fathers of the NPT negotiated this Treaty in the late 1960's , this important pillar of the Treaty constituted the necessary confidence building measures and incentives provided to Non Nuclear Weapon States that made them rally overwhelmingly to the NPT.
However, in order for these States to engage in activities related to the peaceful use of nuclear energy activities and enable the transfer of relevant nuclear technology to them, they need to create the necessary confidence and provide guarantees that they would comply with all commitments under the NPT fully and in good faith and would provide objective guarantees that their nuclear programmes would exclusively be for peaceful use. In this context, a conducive international climate of cooperation needs to be created and which should involve the commitment of the international community at large in order to avoid an atmosphere of mistrust and suspicion.
The IAEA has a unique role in verifying Member-States* compliance with their non-proliferation commitments and it is therefore appropriate that the Agency is endowed with the necessary resources and technical expertise to ensure enhanced compliance, stringent verification and work towards increased detectability of any violation of the Treaty obligations. My delegation also wishes to underline the important role that the IAEA has been playing through its technical cooperation programmes in developing countries in providing a framework for the promotion and cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear science and technology. In this light it is important that the IAEA be equally endowed with the necessary resources and expertise to enhance its safeguards system.
Mr. President,
Last week, my delegation participated in the First Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties establishing Nuclear Weapon Free Zones held in Mexico City. We wish here to commend the Government of Mexico for convening this First Conference in this very historic place where the Treaty of Tlatelolco was adopted 38 years ago and which set the pace for the adoption of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones in other regions of the world.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its conviction that the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones entered freely on the basis of agreements among states contributes significantly to regional and international peace and security. Furthermore, we view these zones as reinforcing the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Compliance with the respective Treaties establishing these nuclear-free zones and arrangements to ensure that the zones are genuinely free from Nuclear weapons constitute important nuclear disarmament measures.
The Republic of Mauritius was among the first countries to have signed and ratified, in 1996 the Treaty of Pelindaba aimed at establishing an African Nuclear Weapon Free Zone. To date 49 African countries have signed the Treaty. 19 African countries have already ratified the Treaty and the process of ratification has gathered pace recently, especially with the advent of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. Only 9 Ratifications are further required to enable the Treaty to enter into force and we are hopeful that this will be achieved soon. Once entered into force the African Nuclear Weapon Free Zone regime will contribute its part to the global disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation processes and will be able to cooperate with mechanisms established under the Tlatelolco, Rarotonga and Bangkok Treaties.

My delegation commends the progress made by the Five Central Asian countries in respect of the establishment of a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia with the successful adoption of a negotiated text in February this year in Tashkent. We look forward to its formal establishment and in the same vein we would like to express the wish for a similar instrument to be soon agreed for the Middle East.
Mr. President,
Before I conclude I wish to highlight an issue of importance and grave concern to Small Island Developing States (SIDS) like ours is the potential environmental, economic and security risk posed by the transport of radioactive materials and waste by sea especially in the SIDS regions. Any accident could cause irreparable damage to the ecological system and affect the very economic survival of many of small island states which are dependent of fisheries and marine-related activities. In the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island States, adopted in January 2005 at the Mauritius International Meeting, the need for the elaboration of regulatory regimes in respect of transportation of hazardous waste was highlighted.
Mr. President,
The 2005 Review Conference presents us with various challenges and widely differing views on each of the issues we are expected to address. However in order to reach a successful outcome dedicated and determined efforts will be needed from each one of us-above all, the political will and flexibility necessary to achieve a successful outcome to chart the course for a safer world.
