Check against delivery
Unofficial translation
1
Statement of the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the International
Organizations in Vienna, Ambassador Alejandro Díaz Pérez Duarte,
at the General Debate of the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
of the IX Review Conference of the Treaty of Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
in 2015.
Mr. President,
Mexico congratulates you for your election and offers all of its support towards success in
our work, which, by the way, will only be measured against progress in the strict
compliance with all dispositions of the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty, across its three
pillars: nuclear disarmament, non proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mexico endorses in its entirety, the statement pronounced by South Africa on behalf of
the New Agenda Coalition.
Even when we adopted a detailed Action Plan in 2010, after a ten year impasse, in this
new review cycle we should focus not only on the implementation of that “road map”, but
also on facing and overcoming the obstacles that do not allow the due fulfillment of the
treaty in the conditions under which it was adopted in 1968 and its extension in 1995.
More than 40 years after entering into force, the undertaking foreseen under Article VI, to
pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the
nuclear arms race “at an early date”, has not been materialized yet. The Thirteen
Practical and Systematical Steps towards the implementation of Article VI adopted by the
2000 Review Conference, contain the unequivocal commitment of the Nuclear Weapon
States to the total elimination of their nuclear weapons in a verifiably, transparent and
irreversible manner. Nevertheless, around 20 thousand nuclear weapons still exist in the
world; many of them, on a high alert operative status.
There is no justification to conserve this type of weapons. It is irrational to confer an
intrinsically strategic value to guarantee international security to a weapon of mass
destruction, such as the nuclear weapon. On the contrary, these weapons constitute a
threat to international peace and security. As long as some States keep conserving
these weapons, others will keep on pursuing them. The doctrine of nuclear deterrence
equals the threat of use of nuclear weapons, in contradiction with the UN Charter. The
possible use of nuclear weapons would contravene the Principles of International
Humanitarian Law and would constitute a crime against humanity.
The only guarantee against the use of nuclear weapons is their total elimination. The
best way to strengthen the non-proliferation regime is nuclear disarmament. What does
not exist, cannot be used or proliferated.
The paralysis affecting the Conference on Disarmament for the past 15 years, unable to
conduct negotiations on any issue of its agenda, as well as the inefficiency of the
Disarmament Commission, is inacceptable. The dysfunctionality of the disarmament
machinery hinders the possibility of reaching multilateral agreements on the matter. My
country has been emphatic in this regard. We reiterate that it is absurd and inadmissible
Check against delivery
Unofficial translation
2
to keep devoting human, financial, professional and political resources to institutions that
do not fulfill their mandates and just feed into an exercise of non-existing diplomacy.
We cannot postpone multilateral disarmament negotiations anymore. This is why, in
2011, Mexico, along Norway and Austria, presented a draft resolution at the First
Committee, in order for the General Assembly to initiate multilateral negotiations on
disarmament. This proposal is still on the table and we will be pursuing it in the next
session of the General Assembly with a view to promote its adoption and start the
negotiations that have not been able to take place at the Conference on Disarmament,
including those related to a treaty for the prohibition of the production of fissile materials
for nuclear weapons and the destruction of existing stocks.
Mr. President,
The three pillars of the NPT are part of an indivisible whole. Along with our strong support
for nuclear disarmament, Mexico has been increasing its efforts to promote nonproliferation.
We have recently ratified the IAEA’s Additional Protocol and, together with
the IAEA and our partners from the Non Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI),
we promote the adherence to this important instrument as an international standard.
We have also continued to update our postures, enact new legislation and develop new
mechanisms and regulations to implement the provisions of the various export control
regimes and relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions issued over this matter.
At the recent Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, we announced the completion of the
conversion of our nuclear research reactor, which has stopped using highly enriched
uranium.
Mr. President,
The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty must enter into force without further delay. Mexico
co-chaired with Sweden the Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Treaty
(Article XIV Conference) last September. At the same time, together with our NPDI
partners, we are launching a global campaign to promote the entry into force of the
CTBT, whose primary target is aimed at the Annex II countries in order to sign and/or
ratify this important international agreement.
Mexico reiterates its strong call to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to resume
their obligations under the NPT, to refrain from conducting any further nuclear tests and
comply with the relevant U. N. Security Council resolutions and the agreements of the
Six-Party talks.
My delegation expresses its firm support for convening in 2012, a conference on the
establishment of a Zone free of Nuclear Weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, in compliance of the 1995 Resolution. Mexico calls upon
Israel and all countries of the region to demonstrate their will to achieve peace and
regional security by actively participating in this conference.
Mr. President.
Check against delivery
Unofficial translation
3
In order to achieve a Nuclear Weapons free World, it is indispensable to attain
universality of the NPT. It is for this reason that we call upon Israel, India and Pakistan to
adhere to the treaty, without preconditions, as Non-Nuclear Weapons States.
In this context, we express our most profound concern for the grave situation posed by
the recent ballistic missile tests performed by India and Pakistan, even when these
countries are not bound by the Treaty. Such actions, together with similar tests carried
out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, create a climate of mistrust,
undermine regional stability and security, exacerbate the nuclear weapons race and
strengthen the mistaken notion of the value of nuclear weapons as a guarantee to
international security, contrary to the objectives of the NPT.
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy come hand in hand with the fulfillment of the Treaty
obligations and collaboration with the IAEA. We are concerned that after continued calls
by the international community to Iran to show greater and constant cooperation with the
IAEA, a definite solution over this issue has not been reached. We support the request of
the Board of Governors for Iran to suspend, immediately and without preconditions, its
activities related with the enrichment of uranium as an indispensable means to
strengthen trust and in accordance with the related resolutions on the UN Security
Council. We are hopeful that the negotiations recently restarted in Istanbul, will be
fruitful.
Mr. President,
From the beginning of this Preparatory Committee, we must act with ambitious goals and
aspirations. We must promote an environment in which there is no room, or reason, for
nuclear weapons to exist. Only in this manner, we would have succeeded in the
fulfillment of the spirit and purpose of the NPT.
Thank you very much.