
• The Government of Mexico congratulates you for your appointment as President
of the Ninth Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). You can count on the support of my delegation for your work
ahead.
• This year's NPT Review Conference coincides with important anniversaries,
including the 70th anniversary of the nuclear-weapons attacks on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki.
• These coincidences highlight the urgent need to implement all the objectives of
the NPT, including disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
Progress of the NPT
• The objectives of the NPT on non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy have generally been met. The NPT has effectively contained the
possibility that more countries develop nuclear weapons. Almost two thirds of the
world's countries are parties of nuclear weapons-free zones.
• The majority of States have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
and the moratorium on explosive tests continues.
• Non-nuclear weapon States fulfill our obligations to maintain this status under
IAEA verification.
• Some countries, including Mexico, have adopted voluntary commitments beyond
the Treaty, such as the Additional Protocol on safeguards or by participating in
the export control regimes . 
• The preliminary agreement reached between the E3 + 3 and Iran demonstrates
that through the provisions established by the NPT, diplomacy can make
headway regarding preserving the regime itself and consequently, maintaining
global stability. Mexico warmly welcomes this turning point.
Nuclear disarmament: the failures and the pending issues of the NPT
• However, there are still more than 16,000 nuclear weapons, many of them in
high operational alert.
• This situation undermines the regime established by the NPT. As long as these
weapons exist, the risk of a detonation, accidental or intentional, will persist.
• Mexico reiterates that the threat or use of nuclear weapons is a violation of
international law and in particular, to the principles of international humanitarian
law.
• Mexico considers the possession of nuclear arsenals neither legal nor legitimate.
On the contrary, as unanimously determined by the International Court of Justice
in its Advisory Opinion in 1996, "There exists an obligation to pursue in good faith
and bring into a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control".
Pending assignment: implementation of Article VI
• Today, more than 40 years after the entry into force of the NPT and 20 years
after its indefinite extension, the obligation to conduct multilateral negotiations in
good faith to fulfill the goal of disarmament, as provided by Article VI of the NPT,
is the only one of its provisions that has not been achieved yet.
• As pOinted out by the Delegation of the Holy See in the Vienna Conference on
the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, last December, we should all
recall that lithe commitment to disarmament embedded in the NPT and other
international documents is more than a legal-political detail, it is a moral
obligation on which the future of the world depends. Pacta sunt servanda is the
fundamental principle of the international system because it is the foundation in
which trust can be built among States and the moral principle states that nuclear
deterrence is an obstacle for peace, concludes the Holy See.
The Humanitarian Initiative
• The review cycle that ends this year also welcomed a renewed momentum to
consider the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons.
• The three Conferences on the humanitarian impact, held in Norway, Mexico and
Austria, have created a greater understanding of the need to eliminate the risk of
a nuclear detonation; have contributed to a better understanding of the spirit and
2 
. .
thrust of the NPT, and have questioned whether collective security and peace
can indeed be built on the existence of nuclear weapons.
• As highlighted by the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
reducing the risk of the use of nuclear weapons and guarantee their elimination
by an international legally binding instrument is a humanitarian imperative.
• Mexico is pleased that more than 80% of the membership of United Nations -
that is, close to 160 States- has already endorsed the so-called "Humanitarian
I nitiative".
An instrument banning nuclear weapons
• Mexico believes in the need to negotiate a legally binding instrument prohibiting
the development, production, stockpiling, possession, transfer, deployment, and
use of nuclear weapons.
• The instrument could be negotiated in the Conference on Disarmament, the
natural multilateral forum for this purpose.
• However, the paralysis of this body makes it necessary to explore other
alternatives.
• The Latin American and Caribbean States, a bellwether region in the prohibition
of nuclear weapons in a densely populated area through the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
agreed in the last CELAC Summit in January, to initiate at the highest political
level negotiations to prohibit and eliminate nuclear weapons through a legally
binding instrument. Likewise, the CELAC endorsed the Austrian P/egde which
as of today gathers 71 States.
The way ahead
• These facts are a living proof that a world free of nuclear weapons is feasible. It
is now time to translate the aspirations of the majority into a tangible reality.
• This Review Conference must therefore be a turning point towards the ultimate
goal of the Treaty: To free the world of nuclear weapons.
Many thanks.
3 