Mr. President,
I have the honour to address this Conference on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Moldova. I would like to take this opportunity to extend my congratulations to you, Mr. President, and other members of the Bureau for assuming the Presidency of the 2010 NPT Review Conference and to assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation.
The Republic of Moldova associates itself with the statement made by the distinguished High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and I will present some remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. President,
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is the most important multilateral instrument for the promotion of nuclear disarmament and prevention of nuclear proliferation, whereas sustaining the peaceful use of nuclear energy. For that reason, my country perceives the NPT as a key instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security that requires a comprehensive implementation.
The 2010 Review Conference is held at a time of significant changes in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. The developments that we have witnessed during the last years - the Five-points plan for nuclear disarmament put forward by the UN Secretary General, the adoption of the 1887 Security Council Resolution, the declaration of the President of the United States of America on 5 May 2009 in Prague, as well as the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty between the United States and the Russian Federation underlined the importance of the NPT in the efforts to consolidate the nonproliferation regime.
The attained progress and the current positive global atmosphere offer a unique opportunity to advance in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, as well as in other directions on the way to general disarmament. To use the momentum, we consider that the credibility of the NPT regime must be strengthened by focusing the work of the Review Conference on addressing in a balanced and constructive manner the obligations under the three pillars of the Treaty and by adopting a realistic program of action with concrete and effective measures aimed at its implementation.
While reaffirming its commitment to the foremost objectives of the NPT to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons the Republic of Moldova attaches great importance to the strict compliance with the NPT and the accomplishment of its universality by bringing all countries closer to the nuclear non-proliferation regime without compromising the integrity of the Treaty.
The establishment of zones free of nuclear weapons essentially facilitates the maintenance of peace and security both at the global and regional level. We welcome the recent entry into force of two treaties creating the nuclear-weapon-free zones in Central Asia and Africa. We also believe that theestablishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East will significantly strengthen the collective security in that part of the world. In this regard, the states in the region should be encouraged to engage in discussions on the establishment of such a zone that would facilitate implementation of the 1995 NPT resolution on the Middle East.
Mr. President,
The Republic of Moldova fully recognizes the central role that the safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has played in providing assurances for the peaceful nature of nuclear programs of States Parties. By being part to the NPT, concluding a comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA and ratifying the CTBT my country has shown its constant commitment to strengthening of the international non-proliferation treaty framework.
Furthermore, my country deposited last February the instrument of adherence to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. We support the IAEA Additional Safeguards Protocol in connection with the NPT, approved earlier by the IAEA Board of Governors, and will ensure its timely signature.
The fruitful cooperation of my country with the IAEA during the last 15 years focuses on peaceful use of nuclear science and technology for critical needs, such as improvement of the radiation security infrastructure, security of radiological sources and efficient response in case of emergency situations, transfer and implementation of nuclear technologies in medicine and environmental science.
At the national level, the Republic of Moldova undertakes all necessary measures to prevent possible transfers through its territory of any components, materials and technology related to weapons of mass destruction. Fruitful collaboration with other countries and relevant international and regional organizations offers the opportunity to use and apply the expertise and best practices in this field and effectively contributes to the prevention and combating of illicit trafficking of radiological and nuclear materials.
The Republic of Moldova will continue its efforts towards the implementation of the provisions of article IV of the NPT and will further strive for responsible development of peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy. We also folly endorse the efforts of the UN and the IAEA in the area of nuclear security and verification, including the safeguards system, export control regimes and protection of nuclear materials.
Mr. President,
The Security Council Resolution 1540 plays a critical role in the common efforts for the prevention of non-state actors from acquiring nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, we strongly support calls for its all-inclusive implementation. With the view of addressing the unlawful possession or use of nuclear devices or materials by non-state actors the Republic of Moldova signed and ratified in 2008 the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
My country pledges for actions towards ensuring compliance and promotion of non-proliferation obligations in accordance with relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including by building adequate capacity for prevention and response to challenges posed by states or entities that are non- compliant with the non-proliferation regimes and threaten regional and international security.
Mr. President,
We consider that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty constitutes an essential part of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and its timely entry into force shall constitute a top priority for all States Parties. Following this line, we welcome the commitments of the United
States and Indonesia towards the ratification of the Treaty and hope that this will give a positive impulse to the remaining Annex II states to sign and ratify the CTBT.
We also regard the early commencement of negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) as critical steps towards fulfillment of the obligations and final objectives enshrined in Article VI of the NPT. Meanwhile, pending this treaty, we must reaffirm the moratoria on the production of fissile materials and undertake our best efforts for the timely adoption of the Conference for Disarmament Agenda and begin negotiations on the FMCT.
Mr. President,
The Non-Proliferation Treaty is a core pillar of the total and complete disarmament and of our collective global security. In order to achieve a genuine security at the international, regional and national levels progress in disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be complemented by reductions of conventional arms.
There should be parallel processes of arms regulations and disarmament in both weapons of mass destruction and conventional arms and in concurrence with the reduction of weapons of mass destruction the international community should address issues related to the production, use, trade and stockpiles of conventional weapons, including small arms and light weapons, which fuel conflicts in different parts of the world and threaten international peace and security.
This issue is of particular interest for my country. Due to the fact that the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova is controlled by a secessionist regime, the Government cannot ensure direct control of a significant part of the Eastern border and, consequently, of the flow of dual use goods and materials that enter or transit Transnistria. Therefore, we highly appreciate the efforts undertaken by the EU Border Assistance Mission in Moldova in cooperation with Ukrainian authorities to monitor the Transnistrian segment of the Moldovan border. The risk of proliferation and illegal trade with arms remains high also due to the persisting presence in the breakaway region of a huge amount of stockpiled weapons and ammunitions. In this context, we consider it imperative to conduct an international fact-finding mission in Transnistria in order to have a clear picture of the stockpiled weapons and ammunitions and to resume their withdrawal and destruction, thus ensuring security in the region.
We share the deep conviction that through common understanding and efforts of all parties involved we can succeed in addressing all the key items of disarmament in the region, thus contributing to achieving effective disarmament and non-proliferation and ensuring regional and international security.
Mr. President,
The Republic of Moldova remains fully committed to the NPT, entirely supporting the strengthened review process of the Treaty. We hope that during this Conference the States Parties will be able to find common ground on various positions and reach a successful outcome that addresses in a balanced manner the rights and obligations related to the three pillars of the NPT, hence attaining our common goal of preserving this invaluable Treaty as the cornerstone of the global nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament efforts.
Thank you, Mr. President.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 576

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 575

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



