Mr. Chairman,
May I congratulate you upon the assumption of important post of the chairman of the Third Preparatory Committee. For me it is indeed a great pleasure to see you, a representative of a friendly country and a fellow member of the NAM, chairing over this very important Session of the Preparatory committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
While my delegation fully aligns itself with the statement made by the distinguished representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Group of Non-Aiigned and Other States Parties to the NPT, I wish to make a few brief comments highlighting the national position of our delegation.
The task of this third session is clear. It is mandated to consider principles, objectives and ways to provide the full implementation of the NPT. This s the basis for the Committee to produce a consensus report containing recommendations to the 2005 Review Conference. At the previous two Review Conferences as well as the meetings of the Preparatory committee Stales Parties reaffirmed in unequivocal terms that the NPT was the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. And that the Treaty rests on three pillars: non-proliferation, disarmament, and international cooperation in peaceful use of nuclear energy. Needless to emphasize also the overarching importance of the reaffirmation that each and every article of the Treaty is binding on the respective States Parties at all times and in all circumstances. We share the view that multilateralism is a concept based on shared responsibility and full compliance by all parties the obligations and commitments under the Treaty. We recall that Nuclear-Weapon- States agreed to an "unequivocal undertakings" to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals. Instead we saw a creeping retreat from nuclear disarmament which has become a source of great concern.
These developments make us to redouble our efforts for search of common grounds and approaches in order to develop an acceptable formula that will allow us to overcome the difficulties that we face today. Such a retreat should not erode the credibility and effectiveness of NPT but, rather, should serve as an urgent call for resolute and effective action. The implementation of the recommendations and practical steps contained in the Final Document of 2000 NPT Review Conference should constitute the first steps towards this end.
Accession to the NPT by those States processing nuclear capabilities at earliest possible date and placing all their nuclear facilities under the IAEA's safeguards are the prerequisites for achieving the universality of the Treaty. My delegation, like many others, would like to see an early entry into force of the Comprehensive nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and calls upon all states who have not yet become parties to the Treaty to accede to it as soon as possible.
Mongolia firmly believes that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones have a positive impact on regional security and stability. Over ten years ago Mongolia declared itself a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Since then it adopted a national legislation defining and regulating that status. At present we are in consultations with our partners on ways to institutionalize that status internationally. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the P-5 States for their cooperation and the relevant United Nations bodies for their invaluable support in materializing the initiative. I would also like to thank the NAM for its steadfast support of Mongolia's NWF status and its institutionalization.
Mongolia considers the creation of nuclear-weapon-free-zones (NWFZ) in various parts of the world by the Treaties of Tlateloico, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba as a positive contribution to the attainment of the global nuclear disarmament objective. We urge the nuclear weapon states that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the relevant Protocols of those Treaties.
Mongolia supports the initiative to convene an international conference of States parties and signatories of these Treaties to seek the ways of implementation of these Treaties and mutual cooperation for this purpose. Iri this context my delegation reaffirms its support for the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and the decision of the five Central Asian States to sign the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free - Zone Treaty.
Mongolia attaches special importance to promotion of multilateralism in area of disarmament and non-proliferation, in maintaining and strengthening international peace and security. While we recognize and appreciate the important role of United Nations disarmament machinery, we also share the view that there is a to need improve and increase the effectiveness of these mechanisms. In this connection my delegation supports the reconvening of the open-ended working group on SSOD-IV.
Mongolia shares the growing frustration over the continued deadlock in the work of the Conference on Disarmament - the sole multilateral negotiating body, its continued inability to resume negotiations on effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other explosive, inability of the UNDC to reach a consensus on substantive agenda items.
Mr. Chairman,
The Prepcom is called to come up with recommendations on the issue of "legally binding security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states" for the 2005 Review Conference. It is the hope of my delegation that at its current session the Preparatory Committee will be able to devote some time to the consideration of this important issue and come up with specific recommendations in accordance with the decision of the 2000 Review Conference to establish a subsidiary body
on negative security assurances to address the legitimate concern of the non-nuclear-weapon states.
We are all keenly aware of the fact that the success of the Preparatory committee's work depends on the perseverance and political will of all parties to reach a consensus. I express the hope that through our concerted efforts and commitments to the cause of disarmament and non-proliferation we will be able to fulfil! the tasks entrusted to us.
I Thank you Mr. Chairman.