\
STATEMENT
by H. E. Ms Ivana Pajevic
Charge d'Affaires a.i. of Montenegro to the United Nations
at the "2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons"
New York, 27 April- 22 May 2015
Madam President,
Allow me to convey Montenegro's sincere condolences and solidarity to the people and
Government of Nepal for their tragic loss caused by the devastating earthquake.
Madam President, let me congratulate you and other members of the Bureau on your election.
You can count on full support and constructive cooperation from our delegation.
Montenegro aligned itself with the statement of the European Union. In addition, we would
like to stress certain points of particular importance to my country.
Madam President,
The Review Conference takes place this year as the international community marks the 70th
anniversary of atomic bombings in Japan. As we engage in our proceedings in the coming
weeks, we should keep those tragic events in the back of our minds to help us all steer our work
in order to make substantial progress towards realizing the vision of "zero nuclear weapons".
For over 45 years, the NPT has remained a cornerstone to the objective of achieving a world free
of nuclear weapons. We acknowledge that a lot of efforts have been invested so far by states
parties, particularly the nuclear possessor states, towards the full implementation of the
obligations arising from all three mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT. However,
commitments under NPT should be reaffirmed. Full implementation of all NPT disarmament
and non-proliferation existing obligations and outcomes remains essential. Therefore, the 2015
Review Conference should be considered as an opportunity to develop a set of concrete and
effective measures for disarmament and non-proliferation that would ensure comprehensive
and tangible progress towards the goals of the NPT.
Madam President,
I would like to express Montenegro's appreciation and strong support for reaching of an
understanding on the Iranian nuclear program between P5+ 1 and Iran, earlier this month in
Lausanne, which could positively influence the outcome of this Review conference. This 
understanding contains solutions to most of the key issues of a Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action that aims to ensure that Iran is in compliance with all its obligations under the NPT,
while respecting its right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Agreement in Lausanne testifies, in a very encouraging manner, to what kind of success is
possible when all stakeholders show strong commitment to diplomatic tools. Montenegro hopes
that the final agreement will be reached within the defined timeframe, and that all involved
parties will take necessary steps in this direction. Final, comprehensive solution has the
potential to go long way for the renewal of trust and confidence, as well as for strengthening
stability and security of not only the turbulent area of Middle East, but also the wider region.
Despite the great adherence, the issue of universalization of the NPT, as one of the most
important preconditions for the full implementation of its provisions, should still be kept high
at the agenda.
Promoting and advocating prompt entry into force and universalization of the Comprehensive
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and immediate commencement and early conclusions of
negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT) continue to be among key priorities.
In this context, Montenegro welcomes the constructive discussions at the meetings of the Group
of Governmental Experts and we express hope that their report will provide guidelines for
future work on FMCT. Before concluding the FMCT, there remains clear need to impose
immediate moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices.
We would also like to highlight the importance of universal accession and comprehensive
implementation of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Conventions, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the conventions and instruments related to conventional weapons.
Madam President,
Montenegro is strongly committed to the objective of a world without nuclear weapons, in
accordance with Article VI of the Treaty. Having in mind the existence of some 17,000 nuclear
weapons it is clear that for more than 40 years after the entry into force of the NPT a rather
limited progress has been achieved in the field of nuclear disarmament.
Moreover, the ongoing efforts to modernize and upgrade nuclear weapons do not go hand in
hand with the spirit of the NPT. With continued existence of nuclear weapons, the risk
presented by their proliferation and the potential impact on the international peace and security
is a constant concern that could never be fully eliminated.
Furthermore, despite the preparations and tireless efforts by the Facilitator which we applaud,
convening of the Conference on the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destructions has not been possible so far. We call on all states in the region to work with the
Facilitator and co-conveners with an aim to organize the conference in due time. We are fully
J 
aware of the unfavorable security context in the Middle East, but at the same time we advocate
for sustained efforts and involvement, especially of key actors, with an aim of achieving Middle
East zone free of weapons of mass destruction.
Madam President,
We wish to acknowledge the campaign to increase awareness on the possible catastrophic
humanitarian consequences that potential use of nuclear weapons presents for humanity. We
welcome the holding of the meetings in Oslo, Nayarit and Vienna and we look forward to
further activities and discussions in this field.
Montenegro underlines the significance of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Safeguards system as a fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, with
essential role in the implementation of the NPT. Therefore, we will further support its
universalization and strengthening.
Madam President,
Beside the activities aimed at full compliance of the national strategies and policies with the
obligations arising from the NPT, Montenegro is strongly committed to the fulfillment of other
international obligations arising from the membership in various multilateral agreements
related to the arms control and non-proliferation. We have established effective export control
system, taking into account measures such as the intangible technology transfers and other
matters requiring particular vigilance.
At a time of growing international uncertainty and aware of the importance of mitigating the
risks arising from the possibility that weapons of mass destruction, nuclear or other radioactive
material fall into the hands of terrorists, Montenegro has adopted the National Action Plan for
the Implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1540, and further strengthens the
national security system in order to contribute to the international mechanisms and cooperation
in this area. Putting an emphasis on universality of international provisions on nonproliferation
of weapons of mass destruction derives from the fact that even small states that do
not possess nuclear capacities or industry are important part of the security architecture that
aims at controlling the use of sensitive materials for peaceful purposes.
Convinced that this international instrument should be considered as a road map to a world
free of nuclear weapons, whereby all states parties must share the responsibility of reaching the
final destination in the shortest possible time, Montenegro will play its part to reach our
common objective of building peace and security, while reaffirming our strong support for the
NPT.
Thank you. 