Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Mozambique I would like to congratulate Your Excellency on your election to preside over this Conference and assure you of the full support and collaboration of my delegation for the successful discharge of your noble mission.
My delegation fully associates itself with the statement delivered by His Excellency Dr. R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as the statement by H.E.Mr. Michel Tommo Monthe, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations, on behalf of the African Group.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The commitment made by the NPT Member States to pursue in good faith measures related to nuclear disarmament, non proliferation of nuclear weapons and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes lies at the heart of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Therefore, continuing steady progress on nuclear disarmament is central to preserving the political strength and vitality of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and remains a key Mozambican political purpose. This conference should therefore stress that the non-Nuclear-Weapon States Parties to the Treaty are willing to work with the Nuclear-Weapon States to fulfill this commitment.
The NPT has moved closer than ever to attaining its universality. It was with great satisfaction that the Government of Mozambique has noticed that the long-awaited Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) was concluded and that progress in the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones has been achieved in Africa, Latin America and Caribbean, Central Asia, Southeast Asia, South Pacific and Mongolia.
The entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty that establishes the African Nuclear Weapon Free Zone is of great importance to Africa and beyond as it contributes to the maintenance of international peace.
My delegation is also encouraged by the prospect of future progress in the Nuclear Free Zones, specially on the exploration of further ways to benefit from the use of nuclear energy and my country reiterates its preparedness to work with the IAEAparticularly in programmes that ensure transfer of technology and national capacity building enabling the establishment of a framework which will allow us to use the nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Therefore it is our believe that this Conference is the appropriate forum to address the issue of the use of Nuclear Energy for peaceful purposes, bearing in mind that the concept of the pillars of Nuclear Disarmament and Non -Proliferation are both important and mutually reinforcing.
We congratulate Mongolia for its resolve to become a nuclear-Weapon Free State contributing to the purpose of strengthening the Nuclear Disarmament and Nuclear Non-Proliferation process.
In the same vein, my delegation welcomes the recent strategic agreement on Nuclear Arms signed in Prague, between the Russian Federation and the United States and expresses our appreciation to other Nuclear Weapon States that have also been taking unilateral steps in the same direction.
Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The total elimination of nuclear weapons must be the result of the global endeavour involving all states in consensus building mechanism. We will continue to support an inclusive debate on the major issues of concern to the whole humanity such as non proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear disarmament.
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty remains a vital element of the non-proliferation regime. We welcome the ongoing moratorium on explosive nuclear testing observed by the Nuclear Weapon States, consistent with their signature of the CTBT.
The Republic of Mozambique supports the consideration by this NPT Review Conference of possible additional measures to provide assurances to non-nuclear weapon states against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. Proposals for such measures must however be able to attract consensus if our work in this regard is to be productive. Our efforts should therefore be devoted to practical proposals capable of winning the support of all groups of states.
Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would also like to touch on the issue of transparency in nuclear disarmament. The international community, particularly the states which have submitted themselves to the obligations of the NPT - have a direct and fundamental interest in nuclear disarmament. In this context, I would like to acknowledge the efforts by some Nuclear Weapon States to share similar information and encourage them to do so, in particular sharing information on the steps they have taken or are contemplating to reduce the number of nuclear weapons in order to obviate the risk of an inadvertent or accidental nuclear strike.
Mr. President,
My delegation believes that working together can accelerate the current pace of nuclear disarmament. The Government of Mozambique is fully committed to working through balanced and progressive steps towards the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons in the world for the well being of the present and future generations.
To conclude, Mr. President, I wish to reiterate Mozambique's commitment to support the efforts of the international community in addressing issues of global concern, particularly the fight against poverty the negative impact of climate change and the promotion of sustainable development.
I thank you very much for your kind attention!










l


l


Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



