At the outset, I would like to join preceding speakers in extending to you our heartfelt congratulations upon your well-deserved election as the Chairman of the Third Session of Preparatory Committee for the 2005 NPT Review Conference. This Session is taking place at a defining moment not only for the NPT but also for the multilateral system in advancing the work of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to see Your Excellency, a distinguished diplomat from our ASEAN region, presiding over this very important Meeting at this critical juncture. 1 am confident that with your vast diplomatic skills and wisdom, you will be able to overcome: the challenges and steer the Meeting to achieve its goals and objectives. I wish to assure you that as always you can count on my delegation's support and full cooperation in your efforts to bring about greater success to the work of this Session.
My delegation would also like to associate itself with the Statement made by Ambassador Rastam Mohd Isa, Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations, on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned Movement States Parties.
We are also pleased to welcome the accession of Cuba and Timor Leste to the NPT. Multilateralism and security issues Mr. Chairman,
The world today is faced with new emerging threats of security challenges such as proliferation of WMD and terrorism. We believe that the only way to effectively respond to these security concerns is none other than through strengthening of the multilateral efforts.
My delegation therefore wishes to reaffirm our steadfast adherence to the Non-Aligned Movement's position that multilateralism and multilaterally agreed solution, in accordance with the UN Charter, provides the only sustainable method of dealing with multiplicity of disarmament and international security issues.
NPT Review Process
Mr. Chairman,
In light of recent developments taking place surrounding the issue of the non-proliferation of WMD, the future of the nuclear non-proliferation regime has been pushed fu rther into greater uncertainty. With only one year away from the 2005 Review Conference, we must make optimum use of the opportunity offered by this Session to assess the progress made to fully implement the Treaty and commitments given at the previous Review Conferences. This Session was mandated to undertake substantive negotiations and produce agreed recommendations on issues of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament as well as to finalize procedural arrangements for the 2005 Review Conference. It is most crucial that this session produce substantive results.
Universality Mr. Chairman,
We have all along stressed the paramount importance of achieving universal adherence to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. As such, we would always welcome not only enlargement of membership, but also rejoining of the one state party that has announced its intentions to withdraw from the NPT early last year.
Nuclear Disarmament
Mr. Chairman,
We hardly need to underscore here that nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament must go hand in hand, as they are unquestionably two interdependent goals It was based on this widely harboured conviction that the 2000 NPT Review Conference agreed on the Final Document, which included the unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear weapon States to eliminate their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament.
However, recent trends in the policies of some nuclear weapon States indicated that there were attempts to de-link the issue of nuclear non-proliferation from nuclear disarmament. All attention has been given to non-proliferation without paying due attention to disarmament. Horizontal non-proliferation is accorded greater emphasis than the vertical non-proliferation on the part of some nuclear weapon States. Nowadays, the issue of nuclear disarmament is facing great difficulty to occupy its rightful place in the agenda of multilateral disarmament negotiation forums. There is now a discernable inclination by some nuclear weapon States towards discarding the existing multilateral system in addressing non-proliferation and security issues. We believe that the multilateral framework such as the Conference on Disarmament remains the best forum for negotiations on disarmament and non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
The International Court of Justice through its Advisory Opinion on 8 July 1996, unanimously concluded that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and to bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control. We continue to attach great importance to the Advisory Opinion.
Mr. Chairman,
We reiterate our call for frill implementation of the 13 Practical Steps outlined in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the Treaty. These are the benchmarks with which we should assess the progress made by the nuclear weapon States to fulfill their commitments in the field of nuclear disarmament. However, an objective assessment of the implementation of these benchmarks shows virtually no progress. It must be stressed here that the indefinite extension of the NPT does not imply the indefinite possession by nuclear weapon States of their nuclear weapons arsenals.
We welcome the progress made in unilateral reductions and bilateral reductions of nuclear weapons by the nuclear weapon States, particularly, the conclusion of the US-Russian Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty (Moscow Treaty). We regard it as a positive step towards reducing their deployed strategic nuclear weapons. However, we share the view that it must be accompanied by the benchmarks of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency to mark progress in these reductions of nuclear arsenals.
The principles and practical steps to nuclear disarmament enshrined in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference should not be allowed to become things of the past due to prolonged lack of progress in implementation. Instead, they must be maintained and further strengthened in our pursuit for ensuring full compliance with all the provisions of the NPT with a view to reaching our ultimate goal of ending the threat of nuclear weapons to humanity and all life on earth.
Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zones
Mr. Chairman,
In our region, we have established the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zone (SEANWFZ). My delegation strongly shares the view that establishment of nuclear-weapons-free zones is an effective measures of geographical limitations of nuclear proliferation, and contributes to non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. As such we support the establishment of zones free of nuclear weapons, including in the Middle East.
Security Assurances
Mr. Chairman,
Security assurances have been widely recognized as a key to strengthening the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. This issue has assumed greater importance and more urgency in the light of recent developments.
We also wish to emphasize the importance of the policy of no first use of nuclear weapons and non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States. The 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference underscored the importance of this issue by stating, in its decision on Principles and Objectives, that further steps should be considered to assure non-nuclear weapon States Parties to the Treaty against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. It also explicitly mentioned that these steps could take the form of a legally binding multilateral instrument.
The 2000 NPT Review Conference has also agreed that legally binding security assurances by the five nuclear weapon States to the non-nuclear weapon States Parties to the NPT strengthen the non-proliferation regime.
I wish to recall that the Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned countries, at their XIII Summit held in February 2003, reiterated their conviction that, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, efforts for the conclusion of a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on the security assurances to non-nuclear weapon States should be pursued as a matter of priority. In this context, they also emphasized the need for Preparatory Committee meetings to continue to allocate specific times for deliberations on nuclear disarmament, implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, and security assurances.
Mr. Chairman,
This Session of Preparatory Committee has also been tasked by the previous Review Conference to make recommendations on the issue of security assurances to the 2005 Review Conference. In the light of the above, this Session should focus substantially on the question of security assurances.
In this regard, we wholeheartedly support the Non-Aligned Movement's call for allocation of specific time in the Programme of Work of this Preparatory Committee for consideration of security assurances. I wish to recall here that my delegation has also proposed at the last year's session for the establishment of a subsidiary body to Main Committee I. in addition to a subsidiary body on nuclear disarmament, at the 2005 Review Conference to enable us to address this important issue of security assurances effectively. It is our earnest hope that given the key role of the security assurances in strengthening the NPT, this Session will take on board the proposal in its recommendations to the next Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
NPT is the cornerstone of the global community's aspirations for nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. While recognizing the inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy under IAEA safeguards, it aims to prevent proliferation and at the same time pursue the goal of disarmament. To sustain and strengthen the non-proliferation regime, both the nuclear weapon States and the non-nuclear weapon States must live up to their obligations. In this regard it is vitally important that significant progress be made by the nuclear weapon States in fulfilling their Article VI commitments and the 13 Practical Steps to nuclear disarmament, if the NPT as well as the world security is not to be placed at greater risk. By no means can we afford this to happen.
This Preparatory Committee has been mandated to produce a consensus report containing recommendations including recommendations on the issue of security assurances and to finalize procedural arrangements to the 2005 Review Conference.
It is our hope that this Session will be able to fulfill this mandate. I wish once again, to assure you, Mr. Chairman, my delegation's whole-hearted support in your efforts to produce a successful outcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.