In 2005, we gathered in New York to review the NPT, but failed to reach agreement. That regrettable failure must now incentivize us all to succeed this time. For we owe it to the victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; to the millions of men and women and the youth who continue to selflessly sacrifice for a world free of nuclear weapons and to ourselves and the future generations. Therefore as we embark to conclude the third prepcom of the NPT review conference and looking ahead with optimism at the 2010 review conference of the state parties to the NPT, our focus at this session should be informed by the strives, setbacks and challenges facing the three mutually binding pillars of the NPT namely: disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Our work at this session is thus cut out for us.
As I extend to you my delegations congratulations on your election, as President of the third Prepcom let me assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation for a successful outcome of this very crucial session. My delegation associate itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the NAM state parties and the statement delivered by the representative of Nigeria on behalf of the African Group.
Chairperson
As a state party to the NPT, Namibia is fully committed to the principles of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and the inalienable rights of all state parties to the NPT to develop research, production and uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. In this context, my delegation wishes to reaffirm that multilateral setting through the NPT provides security for all -nuclear and non nuclear weapon states. Thus all states have a special responsibility, especially the nuclear weapon states to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and relevant technology and promote cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy amongst state parties to the NPT.
On the issue of Assurances of nuclear fuel supply and taking into consideration the complexity of this concept, its technical, legal, commercial and economic ramifications, my delegation believes that this issue affects all member states and as such the vies of all member states should be taken into account and comprehensive, inclusive and transparent consultations should precede any substantive consideration.
The entry into force of CTBT in our view is an indispensable building block in strengthening the international regime for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. My delegation is encouraged by the recent developments building towards the universal ratification .of the CTBT. In this connection, we urge all countries that have not yet signed and ratified the CTBT, especially those listed in Annex 2 to do so without delay. We consider it vital that this Treaty is universal. It is for this reason that Namibia hosted a Workshop for the countries of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) from 1-2 April 2009 with a view of creating and strengthening the momentum to ensure a successful outcome of this session.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that nuclear weapons are a threat to us all, nuclear and non nuclear weapon states. We must therefore build on the emerging momentum to work towards a world free of nuclear weapons. If we believe and see wisdom in a nuclear free world then perhaps we should accept the need to ban the production of nuclear weapons all together.
I Thank You