
Mr. President. 
Allow me to join others in warmly congratulating you upon your assumption of the Presidency of the Sixth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. My delegation is confident of your abilities to steer us successfully through this important conference. I would like to assure you of the fullest cooperation of the Nepalese delegation. 
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons stands at a crossroads, today. Thirty years after the treaty entered into force, there is little we can be proud of in terms of the realization of the purposes of the Preamble and the provisions of the Treaty. Some positive results that have emanated from the operation of the NPT notwithstanding, serious challenges lie ahead to silence its critics that the treaty is failing. Disregard of its provisions by some states, both parties and non-parties to the NPT, should not, however, be viewed as the failure of the Treaty. 
The 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the NPT was a milestone event when we take into account the success it achieved in reaching the three important decisions and in the adoption of a resolution on the Middle East. It should be recalled that those historic decisions viz, the Strengthening the Review Process for the Treaty, Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, Extension of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and the Resolution on Middle East were considered as a package deal. The international community should remain mindful of the nuclear bargain that was struck between Nuclear-Weapon States and Non-Nuclear-Weapon States to give permanency to the NPT. Whereas the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States have kept up their promises of forswearing the nuclear option, there is hardly any evidence to prove that Nuclear-Weapon States have fulfilled their obligations contained in Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Article VI of the NPT reads, quote "Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control." Indefinite extension of the NPT does not confer legitimacy for permanent possession of the nuclear weapons. 
The present situation in nuclear disarmament looks gloomy because of the following realities: 
(a) NPT still lacks credible universality as three of the States remaining outside the non-proliferation regime possess nuclear capabilities, 
(b) South Asian nuclear tests of May 1998 have seriously disturbed the global norm of nuclear non proliferation, and posed a serious threat to the entire non-proliferation regime in shape after 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the NPT. 
(c) START II is still not operational pending the complete ratification procedure of the treaty. This has impeded the early commencement of negotiations on START III between the concerned parties. 
(d) Lack of required number of instruments of ratification continue to prevent the coming into effect of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). 
(e) Re-affirmation of nuclear doctrines and postures by some states justifying the retention of and reliance on nuclear weapons for security continues to undermine the virtues of NPT regime, and 
(f) Eagerness to pursue National Missile Defense programme by the leading Nuclear-Weapon State is likely to impact negatively on the maintenance of the integrity of Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. 
Nevertheless, we believe we should acknowledge the encouraging progress, however limited it may be, made in the field of nuclear disarmament. The recent ratification of START II and CTBT by the Russian Parliament, unilateral decision by some Nuclear-Weapon States to reduce nuclear stockpiles, observance of moratoriums on nuclear tests after 1996 signing of the CTBT, increasing number of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones around the globe and the 1997 Model Additional Protocol to Safeguard Agreements between States and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are indeed positive steps towards achieving long-cherished goals of nuclear disarmament. 
The present review conference of the NPT is taking place at a critical point of time. There is much at stake not only for states and governments but for civil societies and responsible individuals as well. That is why the entire world community is closely watching the outcome of this conference. All know that the success of NPT Review Conference is certainly contingent on the political will of the nuclear powers whose obligations contained in Article VI of the NPT remain unfulfilled. Just a few positive measures they have taken towards nuclear disarmament during the period under review are not going to be much of a help. Therefore, it is time for all to demonstrate what can be done together to make the world a safer place and a nicer place to live in and thrive. 
Mr. President, my delegation believes this Review Conference, in your able hands, will be a success and hopes it will be marked by, at least a promising beginning of a credible mutual trustworthiness among the co-habitants of this Planet towards ensuring a nuclear non-proliferation regime for the sake of ourselves and our generations to come.
Thank you. 

