Mr. President,
I join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your election to preside over this 2010 NPT Review Conference. I am confident that under your able and dynamic leadership the Conference will reach a productive conclusion which will go a long way in strengthening the NPT regime as the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. My delegation assures you of its fullest cooperation in discharging the vital responsibility entrusted to you.
My delegation associates itself with the statement made by the Hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement.
Mr. President,
The international community is far away from realizing the common objectives of the NPT regime. It is ironical that both horizontal and vertical proliferation continues unabated when we meet every five years to review the progress made in disarmament and non-proliferation. Nuclear disarmament has thus become a subject, much deliberated upon but under performed, when it comes to its implementation.
We are not convinced that nuclear weapons have made our planet anymore safer- today than ever before. Today, the concept of security goes well beyond the notion of military security solely based on the primary consideration of accumulation of armaments. There have been compelling security challenges emanating from climate change, poverty and underdevelopment, pandemic disease and terrorism that tend to threaten the very existence of a large chunk of humanity around the world.

 Disarmament must be viewed both as a moral imperative and justice for all. Millions of people around the world are reeling under the grinding and dehumanizing conditions of poverty and hunger. Sadly, on the other hand, billions of dollars are spent in weapons whose very purpose is to kill and maim indiscriminately in a massive scale. As we confront significant challenges in mobilizing financial resources to
achieve the MDGs under a difficult situation in the wake of global economic and financial crisis, making available required resources for development purpose as 'disarmament dividend' will surely send a positive message across the globe.
Possession of weapons; be they nuclear, chemical or bacteriological, is bound to generate tensions, rather than security. It is from this overarching perspective; we look upon the issue of disarmament in general and NPT in particular.
Mr, President,
The NPT regime is based on three interlinked pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. As they are an integral whole, we cannot be selective in pursuing these objectives. It would not be fair, if we allow a selective pursuit of one objective over another by tampering with the interrelated principles that underpin the very soul of the NPT regime. We need a holistic approach to deal with three aspects of NPT regime.
It is true that nuclear disarmament is a long and difficult process. But it is not unattainable if the Nuclear-Weapon-States lead this process from the front. It is necessary to encourage the states to join the NPT which have not yet done so. Universality of the NPT, which enhances its legitimacy, is the key to its success.
My delegation appreciates the signing of the Prague Treaty, the newer version of Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, by the Presidents of the United States and the Russian Federation on 8th of April this year with the aim of reducing their nuclear arsenals and their means of delivery. We are hopeful that this important step would be followed through with equally vigorous initiatives in the days ahead. We should agree to prepare a roadmap to achieve nuclear disarmament in a time-bound manner which could eventually move us towards establishing a Nuclear Weapons Free World in a reasonable period of time.
Pending the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, my delegation firmly believes that the provision of unequivocal negative security assurances by all Nuclear- Weapons-States to the Non-nuclear Weapon States through a legally binding instrument is a must.
The international community must reject the policy of nuclear deterrence and place a permanent ban on nuclear weapon testing. Similarly, the conclusion of a fissile material cut-off treaty with an international monitoring mechanism would be another crucial step.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones in all regions could serve as building blocks towards the complete disarmament at the global level. Implementation of 1995 Resolution on the Middle East would be one of the major contributing steps towards non-proliferation.
My delegation fully supports and thus calls for an effective and faithful implementation of the 13 Practical Steps adopted as part of the final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference for progressive efforts to realize the disarmament obligations of the Treaty. It is a compact jointly arrived at by the parties to NPT and this must be implemented.
Mr. President,
Peaceful use of nuclear energy could benefit entire humanity. Article IV has guaranteed the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Article I and II of the Treaty. These nuclear facilities for peaceful purposes must be put under the supervision and verification of IAEA to ensure not to be diverted towards military purposes. For this, monitoring, supervising and verification capacities of the IAEA have to be enhanced substantially. Equally important for us would be an active and effective technical cooperation program that facilitates the scientific use of nuclear technology for industry, health and agriculture and other useful purposes. This should be given due priority in our deliberations and final outcome of the conference.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me reaffirm Nepal's profound and unflinching commitment to disarmament and non-proliferation. My country is ready to work constructively with all the Member States in realizing the goal of a nuclear free world. This is what our conscience dictates. This is feasible and this is what we should aim at collectively.
I thank you.










 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 8

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 9

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



