Statement by H.E. Ambassador Henk-Cor van der Kwast
Head of delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the 3th
Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2015 NPT Review Conference
General debate 
Check against delivery
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Henk-Cor van der Kwast, Head of delegation of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to the 3th Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2015 NPT Review Conference
General debate
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first to congratulate you with your assumption of the Presidency of this 3th
prepcom. We trust that under your leadership we will be able to create the framework that
will lead to a successful review conference next year. In this endeavor you can count on the
full support of my delegation.
Mr. Chairman,
As the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Frans Timmermans, confirmed in a
letter to the Dutch Parliament on October 24st, 2013, the Netherlands is strongly committed
to a world without nuclear weapons. For the Netherlands, the Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
remains the cornerstone of the international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture.
NPDI
The Netherlands fully subscribes to the statement presented by Japan yesterday on behalf
of Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative. The NPDI, a diverse group of 12 states
that jointly span the globe, tries to promote the implementation of the 2010 NPT Action Plan
through practical and pragmatic proposals. In doing so, it reaches out to other groups in the
NPT-community by looking for common ground and by trying to bridge differences. The
NPDI highly values the input by civil society. The Netherlands will host an event with PAX
and other NGOs on May 2nd.
The Netherlands, attaches equal importance to all 3 pillars of the NPT. Let me shortly say
something about all three of them.
Disarmament
While there has been some progress over the last years, we are not satisfied by the current
pace of disarmament. The debate on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons
underlines the need for urgent progress felt by many nations. Progress in the disarmament
pillar clearly stays behind compared with the other two pillars.
Nuclear disarmament does not take place in a vacuum. In this respect the situation in the
Ukraine gives reason for concern. The breach of the Budapest memorandum of 1994, which
gave the Ukraine security assurances in connection to its accession to the NPT as a nonnuclear
weapon state, has resulted in a change in threat perception in many capitals. 
However, while the current political climate may not make nuclear disarmament easier, this
should not be an excuse to lose sight of our common goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons. The only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
is their total elimination. We call on all states possessing these weapons to redouble their
disarmament efforts .
Non-Proliferation
The Netherlands considers the proliferation of nuclear weapons as one of the gravest threats
to international peace and security.
The Netherlands is gravely concerned by the major proliferation threats to international
peace and stability, including the DPRK, the remaining challenges on the nuclear program
of Iran and the outstanding issues with Syria. All these cases must be addressed in a
resolute way. We will further elaborate on these issues in our cluster 2 statement.
Strengthening of the international safeguards system is a priority for the Netherlands. The
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, supplemented by an Additional Protocol should
be thé international standard for verification. We call upon all States that have not yet
concluded an Additional Protocol, to do so without delay.
Peaceful uses
The Netherlands attaches great importance to the prevention of nuclear terrorism and the
strengthening of nuclear security. That is why we were proud to host the Nuclear Security
Summit that took place in The Hague on 24 and 25 March. Participants committed to
reducing the amount of the most sensitive nuclear materials, to enhance the security of the
remaining material and to improve international cooperation in this field. They agreed to
improve the international nuclear security architecture with a central role for the IAEA. They
further agreed to introduce confidence building measures, to enhance the involvement of
the nuclear industry in security related issues and to minimize plutonium stocks. In addition
to this, 35 countries also committed themselves to strengthen nuclear security
implementation by putting IAEA guidelines into national legislation. In a separate meeting,
ministers of foreign affairs discussed a wider range of nuclear subjects which included
disarmament and non-proliferation.
On the May 7th, the Netherlands Sherpa, Piet de Klerk, will brief those interested on the
results of the NSS in The Hague. You are all invited.
WMD free zone in the Middle East
The Netherlands supports the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East. Like others, we regret the conference could not take
place as forseen but we continue to support the ongoing preparations and commend the
tireless efforts of the Facilitator.
Mr. Chairman,
We will further elaborate on all of these issues in our cluster statements. I am also pleased
to announce that the Netherlands will submit a report to the prepcom on its obligations with
regard to Action 20.
Let me conclude by underlining that the Netherlands remains firmly committed to the
implementation of the NPT and the 2010 Action Plan and will continue to come up with
innovative, practical proposals for its implementation. 
