Statement by H.E. Ambassador Paul van den IJssel
Head of delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
the 2nd Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review
Conference
General Debate
Check against delivery 
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Paul van den %3ssel, Head of the delegation
sf the Kingdsm of the Netherlands ts the 2nd Preparatory Cornmiwee for
the 2815 NBP Review coaferenee
General Debate
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me to join others in congratulating you on your election as chair of this
second PrepCom and to assure you of our full support.
The Netherlands fully associates itself with the statement on behalf of the
European Union as well as with the statements and papers of the NPDI and the
Vienna Group of Ten.
Mr. Chairman.
Disarmament
The Netherlands fully subscribes to the goal of a world without nuclear
weapons. The NPT is the essential instrument to achieve that goal. The discussion
on humanitarian consequences in Oslo recently reminded us again about the
devastating effects of these weapons and hence the importance of making progress
towards that objective.
In 2010 NPT Member States agreed by consensus on an Action Plan. We are here,
to discuss the implementation of that Action Plan in an open and constructive way.
Let us take stock of what has been done so far and let us identify what we still have
to do or have to do better and where we should be in 2015. While doing that let us
not forget that the Action Plan is not about one or two topics that happen to be
particularly dear to us but that it is a package, a comprehensive plan on all aspects
of the NPT.
To make progress on the journey towards a world free of nuclear weapons,
disarmament and nonproliferation are equally important and mutually reinforcing.
They are very much the two sides of the same coin. Making progress on
disarmament will help making progress on non-proliferation, and vice-versa.
However, lack of progress on one should not be an excuse for lack of effort to
realise the other. Disarmament and non-proliferation are not opposing approaches
but should go hand in hand.
The Netherlands has always been an active and constructive supporter of
efforts to further both disarmament and nonproliferation and will remain to be so.
We believe that the best way to make progress on disarmament is a step by step 
approach and by taking practical and concrete steps. Steps can be of a multilateral,
regional, bilateral or unilateral nature. Let me dwell on a number of these steps.
FMCT
For The Netherlands a treaty that stops the production of Fissile material for
military purposes and a CTBT entered into force are essential elements on the road
towards a Nuclear Weapons Free World.
We deeply regret that it has not been possible to start negotiations on an FMCT.
Our disappointment on the lack of any progress in the Conference on
Disarmament over the last I5 years is well known. However the @ontinuimg
stalemate in the CD should not prevent any of us to take further steps in the
implementation of actions 16, 17 and 18 of the 2010 Action Plan, related to fissile
material. Last year the Netherlands together with Germany organised two expert
side events on FMCT, here in Geneva. We will again in the margins of this PrepCom
meet with interested delegations and representatives of civil society on this issue
during the launch of the report of the International Panel on Fissile Material on
Wednesday.
The Netherlands welcornes the establishment by the 67th UNGA of a Group of
Government Experts on a FMCT (67153). The Netherlands actively supported the
resolution to this effect. We are looking forward to the work of this Group of
Government Experts and will contribute constructively to its success in any way we
can. We will submit our views to the UNSG on this issue shortly,
In this respect we also support and welcome the establishment by the UNGA
of the Open Ended Working Group on ways to take forward multilateral nuclear
disarmament negotiations for the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons (67156). The Netherlands will be an active and constructive
participant in the deliberation of the Working Group. It is our firm belief that the
work of the Open Ended Working Group is not a distraction from the NPT process
and should be focused on ways to further and reinforce the implementation of the
NPT Action plan.
The Netherlands remains -consistent with action 13- fully committed to the
universalization of the Comprehensive-Test-Ban-Trealhg and to promoting its
early entry-into-force. The recent testing by North Korea only underscores the
importance of this Treaty and of its earliest possible entry into force. With the
Group of Friends of the CTBT, the Netherlands organized the sixth ministerial
conference in New York in September last year to promote the early entry into force
of the Treaty. The joint ministerial statement that was issued at the meeting was
endorsed by a record 101 States, including all five nuclear weapon states. We
welcome the latest ratifications by Brunei Darussalam and Chad and urge other
states -especially the eight remaining States listed in Annex I1 of the Treaty- to
follow suit without delay. 
Bilateral steps
Mr Chairman,
As I have stated before we need more than multilateral steps alone. The
Netherlands appreciates the ongoing implementation of the new Start Treaty as an
important contribution to Nuclear Disarmament. We believe that in the next round
of negotiations on further reductions of nuclear arsenals between the US and the
Russian Federation all types of nuclear weapons should be included in the
negotiations, includinq non-strategic nuclear weapons. Mutual reductions that take
into account the different starting positions are the next logical step, in our view.
We hope that NATO and the Russian Federation can start discussing enhanced
transparency regarding non-strategic weapons shortly.
Practical steps
The Netherlands is convinced that it is very important to take, where ever
possible, concrete and practical steps to achieve progress and to help us move
forward on disarmament and nonproliferation. In our view, those kinds of steps can
be taken on relatively short term and do not require long and complicated
negotiations.
Military Doctrines
The end of the Cold War is more than 20 years behind us. For many people
the Cold War is something they have only heard of or read about. Today we are
facing a completely different and new security environment in which notions like
'asymmetric warfare' and 'cyber' are some of its key elements. The new
circumstances and ongoing developments which have taken place over the last
twenty years have lessened the role of nuclear weapons. This means the position
nuclear weapons have in defence doctrines can and should be adjusted. We call
upon the Nuclear Weapon States to take concrete and practical steps in that regard,
that reflect the realities of the security environment of the 21st century and the
changed role of nuclear weapons therein.
Transparency
Transparency is another area where more can and should be done, also
without lengthy preparations or discussions. Transparency creates a clearer picture
and builds trust. Transparency also builds a solid foundation upon which further
reductions and sustainable and verifiable disarmament efforts can be based.
Together with our NPDI Partners, we have made proposals to the Nuclear Weapon
States to enhance transparency - pursuant to action 21 of the Action plan. We look
forward to continue a constructive dialogue with the NWS on this subject.
Education
As a last practical step and one that may not produce immediate results but
that will contribute to the sustainability of our efforts in the future, I would like to
mention nonproliferation & disarmament education (action 22). The Netherlands is 
convinced that the continued involvement of a broad well-informed civil and
academic society is essential to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, spur arms
control efforts and enable long term disarmament commitments. In addition to
acknowledging the importance of raising the overall awareness and knowledge of
the general public, we have invested in training the next generation of nonproliferation
and disarmament experts. We have included -again- in our delegation
a PHD student, who by his presence at this conference gets a firsthand impression
of our work here in Geneva and of the NPT Review Cycle. I am hopeful his research
will add building blocks to the Disarmament and Non-Proliferation architecture in
the future.
Nuclear Nsn-Pesliferatiom QAetlons 23 to 46)
The Netherlands stresses that the proliferation of nuclear weapons is one of
the gravest threats to international peace and stability. I am thinking in particular
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Iran, but let's not forget
outstanding issues concerning Syria as mentioned by the EU.
Compliance (Actions 26 and 27)
In relation to Iran's nuclear programme, the Netherlands is seriously concerned
about Iran's continuing production of enriched uranium, the expansion of its
enrichment capacity and the continuing heavy-water related activities as reported
by the IAEA. The Netherlands condemns Iran for these activities as they are in
blatant breach of Iran's international obligations. UN Security Council resolution
1696 (2006) clearly demands that Iran 'suspendCs] all enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, including research and development'.
The Netherlands strongly urges Iran to fully cooperate with the IAEA in resolving
the outstanding issues including those concerning the Possible Military Dimension of
its nuclear programme.
Lastly, the Netherlands fully supports the diplomatic efforts, led by the E3+3 to
seek a comprehensive, negotiated, long term settlement, which would build
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
program.
The Netherlands strongly condemns the missile launch of December 2012
and the recent nuclear test of February 12th, by the DPHK. These are serious
violations of UN Security Council Resolutions 1718, 1874 and 2087, and constitute
grave challenges to the NPT regime. We welcome the unanimous adoption of UN
Security Council Resolution 2094 on March 7th and strongly urge the DPRK to fully
comply with all its international obligations, including all relevant UN Security
Council Resolutions, the NPT and its IAEA Safeguards agreement. We strongly urge
the DPRK -especially in the light of recent developments on the Korean Peninsulato
refrain from any further escalatory actions and provocations, including the
launching of a missile, a new nuclear test or the threat of use of a nuclear weapon. 
Verification and safeguards (actions 28 and 29)
For years the Netherlands has been advocating the universalization of the
Additional Protocol. For the Netherlands the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement, supplemented by the Additional Protocol represents th6 international
standard for verification. Verification by this standard provides trust and the
confidence that nuclear materials are exclusively used for peaceful means. This is
conducive to an environment in which international cooperation, on all nuclear
issues, including nuclear disarmament, can flourish. The Netherlands applies the
most stringent safeguards measures in its nuclear installations and we call upon all
States that have not concluded an Additional Protocol yet, to do so without delay.
We see the continuous development of an ever more effective verification
mechanism as an important task in the field of nonproliferation. We therefore must
not shy away from improvements and new technical capabilities that can aid us in
this. The Netherlands welcomes these new developments, and is in favour of a
verification concept that incorporates this, such as the State-level concept.
The Netherlands is actively promoting the universalization of the AP in
concrete ways. Not only by means of the ongoing extra-budgetary grant to the
IAEA in order to assist the Agency in its efforts in this regard, but we also stand
ready to assist to those Member States interested, to share our experiences and
best practices. This also applies to providing practical or legal assistance.
The Netherlands further attaches great importance to the universal
adherence to other key non-proliferation instruments. Very much in the same vein
as our commitment to the AP, The Netherlands actively advocates universal
adherence to the amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (CPPNM), offering assistance to interested countries and also granted the
IAEA extra-budgetary means for its work on this Convention.
Export Controls (Actions 35, 36 and 37)
Nuclear export controls are a legitimate and crucial means of implementing
States' Party obligations under Article 111, and an important enabling factor for
States' Parties to exercise the rights under article IV of the Treaty. The Netherlands
is committed to uphold the highest standards of export controls and committed to
full transparency in this field. A good international export control mechanism should
be adhered to by all countries in order to maintain appropriate and effective
international controls for nuclear and related dual use goods and technologies,
including as required by UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
Nuclear Security (Actions 48, 41, 42, 44 and 45)
Nuclear terrorism is a real threat with grave consequences of unfathomed
dimensions. Each individual State must do everything within its power to make sure
terrorists never get their hands on nuclear material. This is a fundamental objective
of Dutch foreign policy. International cooperation in this is vital. 
The Netherlands is fully committed to the implementation of the
Communiqu6s and Work Plan and of the Washington and Seoul Nuclear Security
Summits. These gave impetus to the actions of the 2010 MPT Review Conference.
We are honoured to host the next Summit in the Netherlands in 2014.
In the NSS context, we are working on several deliverables. Among them,
reduction of use and better security of HEU, the entry into force of the CPPNM (we
still need 33 ratifications), an increased use of the IPPAS advisory missions of IAEA,
better security of radioactive sources, better cooperation between government and
industry in order to promote a security culture and better implementation. And last
but not least, the introduction of elements of mutual confidence by countries. This
can be done by effective implementation of the existing legally binding and
voluntary measures to enhance nuclear security, as well as possible new elements
such as voluntary peer reviews.
The NL hosts 3 major side events as well. One is table top exercise, called
@tomic, in February 2014 in decision making on nuclear security. The second one is
a Nuclear Industry Summit and the third one a nuclear knowledge summit.
Preventing nuclear terrorism by continuously improving the security of nuclear
materials is a matter that deserves global attention. We therefor warmly welcome
the invitation by the IAEA to the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security in July
2013 and we encourage all States to support this important conference. The IAEA
has a central and essential role to play with regards to nuclear security and we are
fully supportive of that.
Returning to the 2010 Action Plan, we can report that we are implementing
Action 61 by halting the use of HEU-targets in the production of medical isotopes.
The use of HEU fuel had already been stopped some time ago, and at the last
Nuclear Security Summit we pledged to stop using HEU for targets in 2015.
Peaceful Uses
Last but riot least, Mr Chairman I would like to make some remarks about
the third pillar of the NPT: peaceful uses.
I would like to reiterate the Netherlands full recognition of the right of all
Member States to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as articulated in article IV, in
conformity with articles I, I1 and I11 of the Treaty. As elaborated in the paper by the
Vienna Group of 10 -submitted to this PrepCom- the Treaty fosters the
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by providing a framework of
confidence that is a precondition for those uses. By ensuring that nuclear material
and facilities do not contribute to nuclear proliferation, the Treaty creates the
necessary basis for technological transfer and cooperation.
Responsible Expert control regimes play an essential role in guarding
against proliferation and are an important tool for States to implement their
responsibilities under art. I11 of the Treaty. They do not restrict free technology
transfer, as some States parties allege, but rather create an environment under 
which art. IV can be exercised. Export controls do not hinder technological transfer
and cooperation, they enable it.
The Netherlands believes the IAEA has a central role in facilitating States
parties' peaceful use of nuclear energy and we continue to support its efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency. We also continue to pay our full share to the
Technical Cooperation Fund. In addition, we contribute through the EU and by
providing training in the Netherlands, including at the Reactor Institute in Delft,
which DG Amano visited only last week
Mr. Chairman,
I am not the first speaker to state that rights come with responsibilities. The
peaceful use of nuclear energy needs to be accompanied by the highest levels of
safety and security at all stages of the fuel cycle. Although the responsibility for this
lies primarily with the State, we welcome efforts in the framework of the IAEA to
continuously improve these levels and their implementation.
Mr. Chairman,
Nonproliferation, disarmament and arms control have always been and will
remain cornerstones of Dutch foreign policy, with the Non-Proliferation Treaty as its
foundation and the Action Plan as our roadmap. This is an essential part of our
commitment to strengthen international law and security.
The Netherlands will continue to make innovative, practical proposals to
implement the 2010 Action Plan and stands ready to constructively engage with all
other State parties to work on the common goals of a world free of nuclear
weapons. 