NEW ZEALAND
Statement by
H.E. Dell Higgie
Ambassador for Disarmament
atthe
2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
Vienna, May 2017
Mr Chair,
New Zealand is delighted to have the Netherlands, our next door neighbour
here in the UN, in the leadership of this important meeting — the first
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are especially grateful for
the efforts which you, Ambassador van der Kwast, and your team have made
to optimise its prospects for success. I am thinking in particular of the range of
regional consultations which you have convened in recent weeks including the
one in my own part of the world, Jakarta, It is very evident, Mr Chair, that you
have done everything possible to launch this new NPT review cycle on a
positive note and to carry that forward with a smooth transition for next year’s
Prepcom.
I do think, Mr Chair, that at the start of a review cycle one is almost under an
obligation to be positive - to see the glass, at least, as half-full. A new
quinquennium presents us with a refreshed opportunity to look anew at our
agenda, to review the foundations of our Treaty, and to capita lise on each and
every opportunity to strengthen it.
To suggest that optimism should be the order of the day is not, however, to
minimise the challenges we face, including from an international security
situation dominated by heightened global and regional tensions and from the
legacy of the past (most recently, the failure to reach an outcome at the 2015
Review Conference). Nor is it to ignore the extraordinary complexity of many
of the issues which underlie full implementation of the Treaty — these include
the need for its universalisation, the requirement to forge an agreement on a
Middle East free of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), and for
implementation of the unequivocal undertaking given in 2000 and again in
2010 by the Five Nuclear Weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of
their nuclear arsenals.
But it does ensure that we do not lose sight of the benefits the NPT has
brought us nor, more generally, of the clear value of a rules-based approach to
international security issues, We draw our optimism from the terms of the
Treaty itself, from its ‘Grand Bargain’ and from the sense of common purpose
— the desire to eliminate nuclear weapons — which has motivated the NPT
membership for almost 50 years now. We hope that over the course of this
new review cycle our sense of optimism will prevail and that the NPT
membership proves able to take decisive steps forward, most notably in
making progress on the disarmament obligations of Article VI.
The Humanitarian Initiative on Nuclear Weapons has demonstrated clearly
over the last several years the catastrophic reality of the threat, and the level
of the risk, which the international community faces from nuclear weapons. In
New Zealand’s own region of the Asia/Pacific we confront the challenge of the
DPRK’s nuclear ambitions which we continue to condemn in the strongest
possible terms.
New Zealand’s vote at the United Nations General Assembly last year in favour
of the launch of multilateral negotiations on a treaty to prohibit nuclear
weapons and to provide the framing for their total elimination is another of
the ways in which we demonstrate our very strong opposition to the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and our expectation that the NPT’s promise
of disarmament will indeed be realised. Notwithstanding that most NPT States
Parties support this negotiation, we know that not all do so. New Zealand is
confident nevertheless that the UNGA treaty will reinforce the NPT and be an
important enabler of the full implementation of Article VI.
We are confident, too, that our NPT membership will reconfirm the critical
importance of non-proliferation and of the full implementation of the
commitments made under this pillar. In this regard, the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), agreed with Iran, is an excellent example of the
possibility of resolving seemingly intractable nuclear issues through diplomacy
and dialogue. I would also like to highlight the need to continuously
strengthen and universalise comprehensive nuclear safeguards, safety and
security mechanisms as well as the key role of export control regimes in
supporting non-proliferation.
Mr Chair,
New Zealand associates itself with the statements and ambitions expressed
here by the various groupings to which we belong — the New Agenda Coalition
(NAC), the De-alerting Group and the Vienna Group of 10. We will amplify
today’s General Statement with more detailed remarks, which we will deliver
during the subsequent cluster debate.
C