NEW ZEALAND
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENERALDEBATE
STATEMENT BY H.E. DELL HIGGIE
AMBASSADOR FOR DISARMAMENT
22 APRIL 2013
Check against delivery
Mr Chairman
First of all, I would like to offer my delegation's congratulations to you on your assumption of the
Chair of this important meeting, and to reassure you of New Zealand's full support as you undertake
your responsibilities over the coming two weeks.
New Zealand is pleased to associate itself with the statement delivered by Brazil on behalf of the
New Agenda Coalition, and with the statement by Australia on behalf of the Vienna Group of 10.
Mr Chairman
The 2010 Action Plan's adoption by consensus was a critical achievement for the health of this
Treaty. By allowing all State Parties to express their collective will and determine how the Treaty
was to be implemented over the following five years, it provided us with a cl'ear way forward. And it
made this Review Cycle unique by placing it within the parameters of a specific, and in many cases
time-bound, list of actions.
One of the clear benefits of such an approach is that it makes our work measurable. Many academic
institutions and civil society groupings have continued, this year, to put out assessments of how well
we all, as NPT members, are doing in meeting the standards we set in our Action Plan. I would have
to say that even if one is of an optimistic frame of mind - one inclined to find glasses half-full rather
than half-empty - one can only agree with these assessments that there is room for considerable
improvement.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand reaffirms the need to implement all three pillars of the NPT - nuclear disarmament,
non-proliferation and peaceful uses - in a balanced and transparent way if the Treaty's aims are to
be achieved.
The implementation of the Treaty's nuclear disarmament commitments remains as important to my
delegation as ever. Our statement to be delivered in the cluster one debate on nuclear disarmament
will of course go into greater detail on this subject. But it is fair to say that we are afraid that the 
momentum on nuclear disarmament that was so tangible when we met in 2010 is in danger now of
dissipating.
Further urgent work is required to ensure that the promise of 2010 is realised. This is particularly
true with regard to Action 5, which, for New Zealand, remains a pivotal element of the 2010
outcome. We underline the importance of fulfilling its undertakings and we particularly look forward
in this regard to the nuclear-weapon States' report on this action step next year.
New Zealand takes some heart from the fact that, this year, we have the opportunity to advance our
collective nuclear disarmament responsibilities in several fora, including via the Oslo conference on
the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and the open-ended working group.
New Zealand's participation in the full range of international initiatives aimed at taking us towards
the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world is a reflection of our deep commitment to this Treaty
and the decisions and outcomes of its Review Conferences, which remain an integral part of the
Treaty's fabric.
A significant element of the 2010 outcome related to the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on
the Middle East. New Zealand, too, regrets the failure to convene last year the conference called for
in the 2010 Action Plan. We recognise, however, the significant efforts towards that end, including
on the part of the facilitator, and continue to hope that the conference can be convened very soon.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand strongly believes that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are inextricably
linked and mutually reinforcing. An effective non-proliferation regime provides assurances of
compliance critical to the full realisation of the Treaty's goals. Through our own actions,
New Zealand is committed to ensuring the integrity of the Treaty's safeguards system. And we
reaffirm that all States Parties have a duty not only to live up to their own obligations under this
system, but to address issues of safeguards compliance wherever they arise. We remain deeply
concerned about any issue of non-compliance with safeguards obligations and we call on Syria and
Iran to take concrete steps to resolve the international community's concerns in this regard.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand recognises the right of all States Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
conformity with Articles I, 11, I11 and IV of the NPT. We continue to emphasise, however, that the
enjoyment of that right carries with it the obligation to ensure the highest possible standards of
safety and security. The tragic accident at Fukushima only underlined the importance of meeting
that obligation and of international efforts to ensure those standards are constantly reviewed and
updated. New Zealand's strong support for the Nuclear Security Summit process, as well as the
work underway through the IAEA, provides a concrete expression of our commitment to these
principles.
Mr Chairman
Today, more than half way between the 2010 and 2015 Review Conferences, much remains to be
done if we are to accomplish the goals we set for ourselves in 2010. The task before us will take
persistence and a renewed determination. 