SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 20 15 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Nigeria's Statement delivered by 1J.E. Humphrey Orjiako, AmbassadorlPermanent
Representative of Nigeria to the UN Office in Geneva at the General Debate
23 April, 2013
Mr. Chairman,
The delegation of Nigeria congratulates you and other members of the bureau on
your election as Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of this Second PrepCom session.
We remain hopeful that under your able leadership, this session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference would harness the gains of the
past and incrementally build on the success recorded at the First PrepColn under
the guidance provided by Ambassador Peter Woolcott. We assure you of full
cooperation and constructive engagement in the course of deliberations and further
negotiations.
Nigeria aligns itself with the Statement read by Iran on behalf of Member States of
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) that are State Parties of tlie NPT. Having said
this, my delegation wishes to make the following remarks in its national capacity.
We look forward to the forthcoming NPT Review Conference, not the least
because it is expected to evaluate the progress made and results achieved since
2010; including the implementation of undertakings by States Parties, but also in
its mandate of identifying Mher measures that could strengthen the
ilnplementation of the Treaty. By doing this, we invariably build on existing efforts
towards the realization of the overall objectives of the NPT as reflected in the three
pillars of Nuclear Disarmament, Non-Proliferation, and the Peaceful uses.
Mr. Chairman,
These objectives require us to eliminate nuclear weapons, while harnessing nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes for the benefit of manlcind. Nuclear technology
remains benign, beneficial and productive to mankind, until such knowledge is I
adapted for purposes other than peaceful uses. We therefore strongly support tlie
peaceful uses of nuclear technology. 
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation would like to reaffirm the high priority it attaches to complete
nuclear disarmament. We see this as the path to effective non proliferation. We
will continue to emphasize that the existential threat posed to mankind by nuclear
weapons, including their possible use or threat of use, remains unacceptable. The
Oslo Conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons hosted in March
2013 by the Government of Norway made clear that the detonation of a nuclear
device would have grave humanitarian consequences that will spread beyond
national borders and significantly impact human beings across regions and across
the world. This is a price too high to pay. Consequently, my delegation urges NWS
and NNWS aspiring to acquire nuclear weapons to reduce the role of these
weapons in their military doctrines.
Nigeria joins the vast majority of NPT States Parties to express deep concern over
the slow pace of progress towards nuclear disarmament and what could be
considered as lack of real progress by the Nuclear-Weapon States (NWS) in
eliminating their nuclear arsenals as required by their legal obligations and
undertakings. We call on them to promote transparency with respect to their
undertakings on irreversibility and' verifiability. The forthcoming Review
Conference presents us with yet another opportunity to demonstrate such
commitment.
As a member of the De-Alerting Group, Nigeria continues to stress that reductions
in both the deployment and operational status of nuclear weapons should not
become a substitute for their total elimination. Accordingly, we call on NWS to
fulfill, in good faith, their overdue legal obligations under Article VI of the NPT.
This would also help to ensure compliance with undertakings under the 13
practical steps and the 64 action plan of 201 0 on disarmament of nuclear weapons
and to accomplish the total elimination of all nuclear arsenals.
Mr. Chairman,
The indefinite extension of NPT should not be construed as implying indefinite
possession of nuclear arsenals by any Member State, including those that may
aspire to acquire such weapons in the future. Any assumption along this line would
be incompatible with the principles and purposes of the Treaty and impugn its
integrity and sustainability. 
At the 67'" sessioil of the UN General Assembly, the delegation of Nigeria joined
165 couiltries to vote in favour of the resolution banning the production of fissile
lnaterial for nuclear weapons or other nuclear devices. We reiterate that, while
FMCT could serve a dual disarn~anient and non-proliferation purpose, its potential
might not be fully realized, if it is only limited to future production of fissile
materials wl~ile neglecting existing stoclcs.
The delegation of Nigeria loolts forward to the I-Iiglz-level meeting of the General
Asselnbly on nuclear disarnlamellt to be held on 26 September 2013. We are
prepared to engage coilstructively in the meeting and call on all other Member
States to do the sane.
Nuclear safety is another inatter of great concern to Nigeria and we call on the
IAEA to continue to work with all Member States to implement its Action Plan on
Nuclear Safety. This should be done with a view to promoting a robust safeguards
system while enabling peaceful nuclear activities by Member States in line with
colnpliance mechanisms.
Nigeria sees the establishment of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones as a veritable step
towards the total elinlination of these weapons and as a means of pursuing the
denuclearization of all regions. They are crucial components of our meeting and
we should continue to consolidate existing nuclear weapons free zones as the
ultimate regional and contineiltal confidence-building measure. We call on States
yet to sign or ratify the Pelindaba Treaty, including its protocols, to do so without
delay. We also support the call to convene the Confereilce on the establishinent of
a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of inass
destluction in line with the outcoine of the 2010 Review Conference. We regret
that the Conference could not hold in 20 12, as expected.
The long-standing staleinate in the Conference on Disarmament is a matter of great
concern to the Nigerian delegation. This situation has regrettably held back
negotiations 011 nuclear disarmament. We see a lack of political will as being at the
root of this impasse and ' call on all inembers of the CD to show - greater
commitment to resolving the problem to enable the CD achieve the mandate given
to it by SSOD I.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, we encourage all Statcs Parties to earnestly work toward
ensuring the success of the 2015 NPT Conference. On our part, we renlaill firmly
coininitted to contributing ~nea~~ingrully to its success just as we reaffirm our
unwavering con~nlitmento the realization of a world without lluclear weapons.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 