

Mr. President, 
Let me formally congratulate you on your election as President of the 2000 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. With your rich diplomatic experience and your well-known negotiating skills, we are confident that you will guide our deliberations to a fruitful end. In the discharge of this challenging task, I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to assure you of our full cooperation. My delegation would also like to extend our warm congratulations to the other members of the Bureau. 
I wish to pay special tribute to the United Nations Secretary General, His Excellency Kofi Annan, for his leadership and untiring effort for the advancement of the cause of disarmament, and in particular, for his visionary MILLENNIUM REPORT, entitled "We the Peoples: the role of the United Nations in the twenty-first Century", which was published earlier this month. 
Mr. President, 
It is fifty-five years since atomic bombs fell on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This event galvanized the international community to take measures which will hopefully ensure that such weapons would never be used again. It is forty-one years since me United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), in resolution 1380, called for an international agreement to limit the proliferation of nuclear weapons. And it is thirty years since the genesis was established for a global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), under which non-Nuclear Weapon States Parties have committed themselves not to acquire such weapons, in which the five Nuclear Weapon States have also committed themselves to negotiations "in good faith" for nuclear disarmament. 
The NPT has undoubtedly contributed immensely to an international environment conducive to peace and stability and one which is devoid of military competition and wasteful nuclear arms race. It remains the key barrier against nuclear disorder. And it is essential for the well being of the world. This explains why it stands out as the most widely accepted disarmament agreement in history. 
Mr. President, 
Nigeria's commitment to the NPT has been deep and firm. Apart from the effective role which we played during the negotiation of the Treaty at the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC), in the mid-1960's, Nigeria occupies a pride of place as an early Party to the Treaty, indeed the second to sign it. Our adherence to the NPT stems from our conviction that our national interests and security can both be better served by pursuits other than by seeking nuclear weapons. Nigeria's commitment to the 'goal of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World was clearly demonstrated early in our nationhood when in the early 1960s we strongly opposed nuclear tests conducted in the Sahara Desert. It is significant that the initiatives of the African States at that time to denuclearize Africa led to the adoption by the UNGA of the first resolution on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (resolution 1652 of 1961). In demonstration of our firm belief in the Treaty, we have also concluded Safeguards Agreement with the international Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Nigeria's signing of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone Treaty (the Treaty on Pelindaba) is another attestation of our commitment to building a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World. The current Administration in Nigeria under the leadership of President Olusegun Obasanjo is now reviewing all disarmament treaties that are yet to be ratified including the Treaty of Pelindaba. We have also ratified the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) and the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). 
Mr. President, 
The challenge before us, as we begin our deliberations, is the effective implementation of the terms of the NPT following the Decisions we took in 1995 on its indefinite extension. That requires that we consider how well the objectives we set ourselves in 1995 have been met and what needs to be done. Such an effort would bring us closer to the realization of the seven principles and objectives contained in the 1995 Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament. It is in this context that I offer the following comments. 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament 
Nigeria attaches great importance to nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament which are the inseparable twins of Article VI of the NPT. 
On nuclear non-Proliferation, the number of adherents to the NPT has continued to increase and now stands at 187 including the five Nuclear Weapon States. We heartily welcome the new members that have acceded to the Treaty since our last Review Conference. While universality is within reach, there are still a number of countries that have decided not to join the NPT. The challenge facing the international community is how to engage these States through some sort of consultative mechanism. One such mechanism could be the NPT MANAGEMENT BOARD which my delegation is proposing that we establish for handling certain NPT-related functions. I will speak more about our proposal later on in my speech. 
The fact that 182 out of the 187 States Parties to the NPT are non-Nuclear Weapon States has manifestly demonstrated that Security is possible without nuclear weapons. The establishment of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones (NWFZS) by these same non-Nuclear Weapon States in their various regions further reinforces the fact mat nuclear weapons do not guarantee security. Rather they distract from it.
The NWFZs created in Latin America and the Caribbean, the Soup Pacific, Africa and South East Asia comprise about 110 United Nations Member States, and together they form a nuclear weapon free mantle over vast and densely populated areas of the Southern Hemisphere. Proposals to establish additional NWFZs in Central Asia and the Middle East would represent a further step in the direction of a Nuclear Weapon Free World. It is evident from these developments that the non-Nuclear Weapon States are fulfilling their share of the obligations under the NPT. 
Mr. President, 
We should therefore be clear where the problem lies. It lies in the continued existence of and reliance on nuclear weapons for Security, and how to achieve nuclear disarmament. When we extended me NPT indefinitely in 1995, we did not indefinitely extend the possession of nuclear Weapons by the Nuclear Weapon States. In fact, in 1995, we set ourselves a programme of action for nuclear disarmament. Regrettably, that programme of action remains unimplemented. I will cite a few examples to bring this point to the fore: 
There has been no new treaty on the reduction of nuclear Weapons; START II ratified by the United States in 1996 was ratified by Russia two weeks ago. My delegation welcomes this long-awaited ratification of START II, and hopes that this will lead to accelerated process of negotiations under START III. There are no negotiations covering the Nuclear weapons possessed by the other three Nuclear Weapon States (United Kingdom, France and China). There are also no negotiations on the reduction and destruction of all tactical nuclear weapons. 
The CIBT signed in 1996 has not yet entered into force because of Me continuing delay in securing The required number of ratifications by designated States. My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate the Russian Federation, one of the designated States, for ratifying the CTBT. In this connection, we are of the view, that the nuclear tests conducted in 1998 by India and Pakistan are set backs for the international norms created for nuclear non-proliferation. 
The Conference on Disarmament has not begun negotiations on a convention banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. In fact, the failure of the CD, the single multilateral negotiating forum, for the third year in succession to engage in any negotiations, is a source of serious concern to the Nigerian delegation. 
To complicate nuclear disarmament efforts, we are now witnessing the developments of strategic nuclear doctrines that continue to rely on nuclear weapons for security. As the United Nations Secretary General rightly in his Millennium Report, "the objective of Nuclear non-proliferation is not helped by the fact that the Nuclear Weapon States continue to insist that those weapons in their hands enhance security, while in the hands of others Hey are a threat to world peace". 
My delegation is concerned about the possible deployment of anti-missile defence systems which could have negative implications for the reductions of the number of nuclear weapons. Our preference is for negotiated settlement of the differences which had arisen between the United States and the Russian Federation regarding the bilateral 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM Treaty). 
Mr. President, 
It is very clear from the foregoing that we have not met all of the objectives we set ourselves in 1995. While nuclear nonproliferation is on track, little progress has been recorded in nuclear disarmament. In spite of this disappointing situation, Nigeria has not lost hope in our collective ability to explore and find common ground on how to move forward. 
The Way Forward

1. NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT 
There is no doubt that the Nuclear Weapon States bear primary responsibility for taking tangible steps toward the elimination of nuclear weapons which exist in the thousands. The situation is further compounded by the lack of adequate safe and physical protection. The possibility that these weapons could be transferred to unauthorized hands through smuggling. Efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament cannot be left to the Nuclear Weapon States alone. The international Community has a role to play. Some important proposals have already been put forward by members of the international community. These include the forward-looking initiatives taken by the New Agenda Coalition. The realistic nuclear disarmament agenda proposed by the Coalition was very ably addressed on Tuesday by the distinguished Foreign Affairs Minister of Mexico. My delegation endorses the Coalition's proposals including the idea that we can pursue nuclear disarmament efforts in a sort of constructive parallelism at the bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral levels. 
Mr. President, 

What we need now is to capitalize on the positive trends of the new initiatives and proposals and use them to advance the cause of nuclear disarmament. The time has come for serious dialogue between the Nuclear Weapon States and the non-Nuclear Weapon States. In this regard, my delegation would like to appeal to the Nuclear Weapon States to take time to respond to the abovementioned initiatives and proposals. Such gesture will certainly enable us to find a common ground in moving nuclear disarmament forward. The UN Secretary General's proposal in his Millennium Report to me effect "that consideration be given to convening a major international conference that would help to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers" is very timely. 
2. Strengthening the Review Process for the NPT

The three Sessions (1997, 1998 and 1999) of the Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) for this Conference did not produce the desired results. According to the mandate contained in the 1995 Decisions, the PrepCom was required to take decisions on procedural matters as well as make recommendations on substantive issues. The PrepCom only succeeded in to king decisions on procedure, leaving out substantive issues for consideration by this Conference. We need to look at how to improve the functioning of the review process so that it can accomplish more than just adopting decisions on Procedure. 

3. Security Assurances to Non-Nuclear Weapon States

This is a subject that deserves serious attention by this Conference. Paragraph 8 of the 1995 Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament reads inter alia "....further steps should be considered to assure non-Nuclear Weapon States party to the Treaty (NPT) against the use or threat of Nuclear Weapons. These steps could take the form of internationally legally binding instrument". Since the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, two new proposals have been submitted to assist in the "further steps" to be taken on security assurances. They include a Draft Protocol to the NPT submitted in 1997 by Nigeria, Myanmar, Kenya and Sudan to the first Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 2000 NPT Review Conference in document NPT/CONF.2000/PC.1/32; A draft Protocol submitted in 1999 by South Africa to the Third Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 2000 NPT Review Conference in document NPT/CONF.2000/pc.111/9. It is Nigeria's hope that all States Parties would lend their valuable support for adequate consideration of the proposals by Nigeria and other States.

The fact that 110 United Nations Member States already have Security Assurances through Memberships in NWFZ treaties should not prevent the negotiation and conclusion of a legally binding treaty on Security Assurances for NPT parties. 
4. The Need for NPT-based Mechanisms 
(a) Managing the NPT
The NPT is the cornerstone of the global nuclear nonproliferation regime and it has served the international Community very well. In recent times, it has been facing serious challenges. Those challenges as well as the recurring differences and confrontations each time an NPT Review Process is in motion, have revealed the weakness of the NPT, the vulnerability of the nonproliferation regime, and the fragility of the coalition that brought about consensus decisions at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference.
Management questions have too often been at the core of the problems of the NPT Review Processes. Indeed, during the long intervening periods between Review Conferences, NPT parties do not have NPT-based mechanisms to turn to for their frustrations, concerns, complaints, or difficulties. In the past, such frustrations have been allowed to reach boiling point and are then heaped on the Review Conferences resulting in inconclusive meetings in certain cases.
As a response to the management challenges facing the NPT, my delegation would like to propose that we consider the desirability of creating an NPT MANAGEMENT BOARD. The scope of the functions of the proposed Board including its composition should be seriously considered at this Conference. 
(b) Subsidiary bodies/Working groups.
The decision we took on Monday on Subsidiary bodies should now allow us to engage in a focused consideration of issues relating to nuclear disarmament. In this connection, my delegation is of the view that the issue of security assurances could be dealt with by a working group to be established under Main Committee I.
5. Updating the Principles and Objectives of Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
The 1995 Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament (P&O) are essential yardsticks for measuring progress from one Review Conference to the other. We therefore consider it useful to commence from this Review Conference the process of regularly updating the P&O. The updated 2000 Principles and Objectives will then serve as benchmarks for the next Review Conference. 
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
Nigeria attaches utmost importance to international cooperation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We are aware of the considerable contribution of nuclear technology and applications in food and agriculture, mining, water resources development, medicine, industry, electrical power and research. It is in this context that we fully commend the crucial role the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been playing in the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology. It is of crucial importance for IAEA to continue to function effectively and efficiently. In this regard, we would like to see some real growth in its regular budget. 
Concluding Remarks 
Mr. President,
As this is the First Review Conference of the NPT following its indefinite extension, the future of the NPT should be close to our hearts. We should therefore focus our attention on what we can do to strengthen the Treaty and not weaken it. We have a special responsibility to set a good tone for the next Review Conference in 2005, and to set the agenda for subsequent sessions.
The question is how best to achieve our future agenda. The answer lies in how we determine priorities. While we all have our national concerns and priorities, nevertheless/ the best way forward is to look beyond those national priorities and to focus on our collective interests.
As we begin to review NPT-related developments, let us jointly set ourselves precise and realistic goals, bearing in mind that in disarmament, progress however modest or incremental is a positive development for disarmament.
I thank you. 

