PERMANENT MISSION OF NIGERIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
828 SECOND AVENUE • NEW YORK, N. Y. l 0017 • TEL. (2 12) 953-9 l 30 • FAX (212) 697-1970
(Please Check Against Delivery)
STATEMENT
BY
H.E. PROFESSOR U. JOY OGWU
AMBASSADOR/ PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF NIGERIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO
THE TREATY ON THE PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (NPT) .
NEW YORK, TUESDAY 28TH APRIL 2015. 
Madam President,
Excellencies
~uuemen1 oy r~1ger1a
at the General Debate of the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 28th April, 2015
Distinguished Delegates,
Ambassador Ferouhhi, the delegation of Nigeria congratulates you on your election
as President of the 1Xth Nuclear Non-Proliferation Review Conference. We are
confident of your commitment to this process and remain hopeful that the conference
would achieve a successful conclusion under your able leadership. As one of the VicePresidents,
we assure you of our full cooperation and constructive engagement in the
course of debates and negotiations. NI y delegation would like to offer condolences to
the Government and people of Nepal over the recent devastating earthquake.
\X'e align ourselves with the Statement delivered by Iran, Nigeria, The Netherlands
and Austria on behalf of the Non-Aligned :Niovement (NAM), the African Group, the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) and the Group of 156
countries on the Hwnanitarian Consequences of nuclear weapons.
This Conference provides a unique opportunity to review steps taken since 2010, as
well as restate our commitments to the exceptional role of the NPT as pivotal to our
collective resolve to banish nuclear weapons from arsenals of States, prevent their
proliferation and assess the impact of harnessing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
and human progress, through cooperation, and in line with its .l\rticles IV.
It should further assist us to evaluate the progress made in the implementation of
undertakings by States Parties, while offering fresh perspectives and identifying further
measures that could strengthen the implementation of the Treaty. My delegation restates
that the objectives of NPT require us to eliminate nuclear weapons, while
harnessing nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Need I underscore that nuclear
technology remains benign, beneficial and productive to mankind, until such
11::;. ::, ' 
K11uw1cugc i~ auap[ea ror purposes otner man peacetUl uses. lhls was one ot the noble
considerations when the treaty entered into force forty-five years ago - that nuclear
technology seizes to be manipulated and converted into manufacturing weapons of
mass destruction.
Madam President,
As we commemorate the 70 years after the danger and horror of .Hiroshima and
Nagasaki later this year, let me reiterate that nuclear weapons remain a present and
existential threat to mankind. We no longer deal ·with the early generations of atomic
bombs, but a collection and modernization of far more powerful and overwhelmingly
lethal weapons, whose detonation may signal or perhaps spell the doom of our entire
planet. The onus therefore rests on us, to work concertedly to avert the catastrophic
hutnanitarian consequences of their use. Let us be reminded of the valuable quote
from the former South African President Nelson Mandela who warned that, "in reality,
no rational answer can be advanced to explain, in a satisfactory manner what; in the
end, is the consequences of Cold War inertia and an attachment to the use of the
threat of brute force to assert the primacy of some States over others". In agreement
with the late Statesman, my delegation continues to stress that the existential threat
posed to mankind by nuclear weapons, including their possible use or threat of use,
remains unacceptable. In view of this, let me also emphasize that while nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation remain mutually reinforcing, it is an unmistakable
fact that nuclear disarmament remains the only effective path to non-proliferation.
As a member of the de-alerting and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
Groups, my delegation supports the measures put forward towards ensui-ing nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, including increased transparency in nuclear
disarmament, the de-alerting of operational readiness of nuclear weapons, continued
efforts to facilitate the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTB1)
and attempts to commence negotiations of a ban in production and stockpiling of
Fissile Material for nuclear weapons as a treaty.
:Nly delegation supports the gro'\vi.ng focus on the hwnanitarian consequences of the
use of nuclear weapons, an element firmly anchored in the NPT, and reflected in the
2010 final document. We welcome the convening of the three meetings in Oslo,
N ayarit and Vienna and endorses the Pledge issued at the Vienna Conference on the
2 
t-1umanuanan impact ot Nuclear Weapons. Notwtthstandtng the ongoing ettorts to
address nuclear disarmament, Nigeria welcomes additional diplomatic process which
could negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons. It is in view
of this that my delegation supports the joint statement delivered on behalf of 156
States Parties by the distinguished Federal Minister for Europe, Integration and
Foreign Affairs of Austria.
The implementation of the Action Plan, consensually adopted at the 2010 Review
Conference, remains a good basis for our deliberations. As a confidence-building
measure, expectations should neither be lowered nor diminished, as we remain
committed to implementing the Action Plan, and avoid altering agreed terms. 1be
objective is to fully comply with the obligations and commitments, particularly with
the full and prompt implementation of all the actions in the 2010 NPT. The support of
nuclear weapon States becomes crucial in this regard and this becomes more urgent as
NPT appears confronted by serious challenges, not the least, by the nonimplementation
of a substantial number of actions that are central to the Treaty.
Madam President,
My delegation welcomes the gesture by nuclear weapons States to reduce the stockpile
of these inhumane weapons. Our highest expectation as a State Parties; however,
remains the total elimination of nuclear arsenals by State that posses these weapons, to
fulfill, in good faith, their legal obligations as highlighted in Article VI of the Treaty. In
the final analysis, it is the demonstration of.their full commitment to the principle of
nuclear disarmament that can truly lead to the objectives of the NPT. In the same
context, my delegation sees neither moral nor acceptable reason for other States not
party to this Treaty, to continue to threaten the peace of the \Vorld by developing,
testing and adamantly defending their justification to possess these weapons of mass
des t.ruction.
Nuclear weapon-free zones play an important role in preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons as a veritable step towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons
and ensuring the denuclearization of all regions. The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
3 
Lone l reaty \ l reaty ot lJeltndaba) connnues to consolldate on the obJecttve tor its
establishment. The African Commission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE), a mechanism
established for measuring compliance with undertakings of disarmament, nonproliferation
and peaceful uses, has continued to play vital role towards attaining the
objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation since its establishment in 2010.
While my delegation continues to promote the Pelindaba Treaty, Nigeria fully supports
the establishment of such free zones across all regions, including in the Middle East. In
this regard, my delegation reiterates its call for holding the agreed conference on the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
_destruction in the region as the minimum starting point. Time is of the essence and
actions n1ust follow our avowed commitments.
Madam President,
Nigeria supports the protection of the inalienable rights of all State Parties to the
Treaty to use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. While ensuring its continued
efforts to meaningfully contribute to meeting basic human needs on vital issues such as
power generation, food security, health, water management and the environment, we
call for continued and strident collaboration between the IAEA and States Parties to
implement its Action Plan on Nuclear Safety. 1vly country currently operates research
facilities as part of efforts to ensure the realization of a sustainable future for our
people and has benefitted from IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme in this
regard, an important action emphasized in the Final Document of the 2010 review.
A strong case for adherence to the NPT is the continued incidences of trafficking in
nuclear materials and the threat and likelihood of nuclear terrorism. My delegation is
glad to report that Nigeria has taken steps towards ratifying the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (ICSAN1). Ultimately,
no nation is safe, in the event of a successful act of nuclear terrorism. In this regard,
my delegation calls on States that are not party to NPT, to join the Treaty, without
precondition; and to place promptly, all existing nuclear facilities under IAEA. fullscope
safeguards, in conformity with the non-proliferation regime.
4 
'"fhe many benefits of nuclear disarmament are never in doubt and States Parties, and
indeed all ~1ember States of the United Nations, must concretely demonstrate sincerity
of purpose and commitment to the goal of nuclear \veapons disarmament. Nigeria is
strongly committed to meeting its obligations under the Treaty and my delegation
promises to be constructively engaged in the course of this conference.
I thank you.
5 