(Check against delivery)



Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

29 April 2015

Statement by Mr. Bård Glad Pedersen
State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway

Madam President, Excellences, ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of my country, I wish to convey our condolences for the victims of the tragic
earthquake in Nepal. Our thoughts and sympathy are with all victims and the people of
Nepal. I also wish to congratulate you, ambassador Feroukhi, on being elected president for
this conference.
We are here to seek agreement; on concrete steps and a path forward towards a safer world.
A world without nuclear weapons. Our task is as important as it is challenging.
The civil war in Syria continues and we have witnessed the use of weapons of mass
destruction. Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and destabilisation of eastern Ukraine is a
violation of international law and contrary to the Budapest memorandum. The risk of nuclear
proliferation remains a challenge and a threat towards international security. Nuclear tests
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a clear violation of its
international obligations. 
(Check against delivery)
Nevertheless, there have also been positive developments. The Nuclear Security Summits
have contributed substantially to nuclear security and to keeping fissile material beyond the
reach of terrorists. Negotiations with Iran have proceeded, and a verifiable long-term
agreement can be within reach. The establishment of a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in
Central Asia is a welcome step forward.
Norway welcomes the continued implementation by the US and the Russian Federation of
the new START. However, progress on Article 6 is disappointing. The nuclear weapons
states needs to increase their efforts. We urge Russia to respond positively to the US
proposal to reduce the number of strategic nuclear warheads by an additional one-third.
Madam President,
We share the vision of a world without nuclear weapons. The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
is the foundation for the global non-proliferation regime. Over the next four weeks, we must
work constructively to produce a result that strengthens the NPT and its three pillars.
We should aim for agreement on the following:
 The new START accord should be considered a first step in a more intensified process
of nuclear arms reduction, covering all categories of weapons, and involving all
nuclear weapon states. New types of weapons should not be developed, and
disarmament should be pursued on the principles of transparency, verification and
irreversibility.
 The process of reducing the role of nuclear weapons in security policy must be
accelerated. An important step would be to further strengthen negative security
assurances. 
(Check against delivery)
 We must intensify efforts to sustain existing regional Nuclear Weapons Free Zones,
and to create new ones. We need to move forward towards a zone free of weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East.
 We must make real progress towards entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban
Treaty (CTBT).
 We must start negotiating a treaty that bans the production of fissile material for
weapons purposes, and start the process of reducing existing stocks.
 We must strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We should
reach common understanding of the fact that the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and Additional Protocols protect our collective security and facilitate
peaceful uses. We welcome progress on state-level safeguards, and the improvements
on their effectiveness and efficiency, particularly considering the expected growth in
nuclear energy.
 We must secure all fissile materials. It is encouraging that a growing number of
civilian research reactors that used to use highly enriched uranium are now being
converted to low enriched uranium. In Norway, we have discontinued the use of
highly radioactive sources in our hospitals.
 We should reaffirm the right to peaceful nuclear power applications. The work of the
IAEA is crucial for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Norway intends to
strengthen its support for this work, and I am happy to announce that we have
decided to support financially the Agency’s Peaceful Uses Initiative.
(Check against delivery)
Madam President,
Norway is working on numerous projects to support the goal of a world without nuclear
weapons.
Firstly, the Oslo Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in March
2013, and the two following conferences in Nayarit and Vienna, were successful. The Joint
Statement on the Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons is a clear manifestation
of the importance of this perspective. We particularly encourage the nuclear weapon states
to sign up to this statement. Norway has submitted a working paper on the Oslo Conference
and its main findings.
We hope to see a clear commitment to the humanitarian perspective on nuclear weapons in
the outcome of this conference. This should also reflect the important contribution from civil
society, whose efforts we value greatly. The three conferences on humanitarian
consequences will be presented at a side event on 6 May, co-hosted by Norway, Mexico and
Austria.
Secondly, the UK–Norway Initiative on Nuclear Warhead Dismantlement will continue to be
crucial in our efforts to fulfil Article 6. We have submitted a working paper on the Initiative
and will host two side events.
We also welcome the launch of the International Partnership on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification (IPNDV), as a follow up to President Obama’s Prague speech in 2009. There is
now a broad coalition of nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states that are working together to
achieve real progress on verification, a necessary step in implementing Article 6. Norway
will chair the next plenary meeting of the partnership this autumn.
(Check against delivery)
Thirdly, at the Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, Norway and Sweden offered to enter
into a partnership with Ukraine to strengthen the safety and security of its nuclear power
plants. Norway undertook to support the ongoing initiatives led by the US and Ukraine in
the areas of radioactive source security and border control. We have now established a longterm
cooperation with Ukraine.
In addition, I would like to draw your attention to the working paper submitted by the five
Nordic countries on nuclear disarmament. And I would like to mention that Norway is a
member of the Vienna Group of 10, which submitted a working paper containing valuable
and practical guidance on non-proliferation and peaceful uses.
At this conference, we have an opportunity to renew and strengthen the Treaty that forms
the basis of all these efforts. Let us make sure that we do just that. In the interest of peace
and security for all of us, and generations to come.
Thank you, Madam President.