NPT Pre~ Com 2013. General debate.
Check aaain9t deliverv
Statement by Norway.
The NPT review conference in 2010 referred explicitly to the catastrophic
consequences any use of nuclear weapons would have. This was an important
message from the world community. Since 2010, we have seen the humanitarian
impact of nuclear weapons increasingly being recognized as a fundamental, and
globai, concern that must be at the core of all our deliberations regarding nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts.
in March this year the Government of Norway hosted an international conference on
the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. The aim of the Conference was to
prov~de an arena for the international community to have a facts-based discussion of
the humanitarian and developmental consequences that would result from a nuclear
weapon detonation. The Conference focused on what actually happens on the
ground after a nuclear detonation. The consequences of a nuclear detonation are
relevant to practitioners in such diverse fields as health services, development,
environment, finance, and emergency preparedness. So far there had been no global
arena in which to begin to discuss these issues. That is why Norway decided to
organize the Conference, and to invite a wide-range of stakeholders. All interested
states, as well as UN humanitarian organizations, the Red Cross/Red Crescent
Movement, representatives of civil society and other relevant actors were invited to
the Conference.
The Conference was held over two days and included presentations by international
experts and relevant national and international stalteholders concerning three key
aspects:
1. The immediate humanitarian impact of nuclear detonations 
2. The wider and more longterm developmental, health and environmental
conseauences
3. Preparedness, including plans and existing capacity to respond to this type of
disaster
128 states met at the Conference, together with UN organisations, the ICRC, IFRC
and civil society. The Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs hosted the Conference.
The High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Director of OCHA in Geneva, the Secretary
General of the Norwegian People's id and the International Campaign to Abolish
Nuclear Weapons (ICAN) addressed the Conference's opening session. All
presentations are available on the Conference website and a DVD will be made
available shortly.
The broad and active participation at the Oslo Conference reflects the recognition
that the catastrophic effect of a nuclear detonation is an issue of concern and
relevance to all.
The main conclusion from the conference is that no state or international body could
address the immediate humanitarian emergency caused by a nuclear weapon
detonation in any meaningful way. No existing national or international emergency
system would be able to provide adequate assistance to the victims.
The use and testing of nuclear weapons in the past has demonstrated not only their
devastating immediate effects, but also the serious long-term effects. The effects of
a nuclear weapon detonation will not be constrained by national borders, and will
affect states and people in significant ways, regionally as well as globally. [Nuclear
detonations affect future generations' health, food security and vital natural
resources and hamper socioeconomic development. While political circumstances 
have changed much in recent years, the destructive potential of nuclear weapons
remains with us.]
The possibility of a nuclear weapon's detonation, intended or not intended,
represents a significant threat to humanity. We must continue to actively address
this threat, and to place the humanitarian impact at the core of our efforts.
We believe that there is a new sense of urgency that will govern our work in this
area. We have also recently been reminded in very sharp terms that the use of these
weapons is considered to be a realistic option. We cannot approach nuclear
weapons through a strategy of denial. As long as the probability of a nuclear
weapons detonation exists, the consequences of such an event means it must be a
humanitarian concern. While the overall number of nuclear weapons in the world
has decreased since the end of the Cold War, tens of thousands of nuclear weapons
remain in the arsenals of states. Meanwhile, the number of states with access to
these arms has increased. This means that, combined with continued documented
nuclear weapons accidents and the ever-present risk of nuclear theft or diversion,
the dangers must be addressed.
The devastating effects of nuclear detonations have been well documented through
experience from the field. These realities must giride our efforts if we are to achieve
meaningful progress. We welcome Mexico's offer to host a Conference to further
discuss these issues. We are loolting forward to continue to broaden the discussions
on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. This is an issue that affects us all. 