Mr President
We support your leadership and pledge our co-operation during this important Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference.
It is true, as many distinguished speakers before me have observed, the current conducive international climate lends itself to possibilities and opportunities to make this Review Conference a success.
In this regard, we would also acknowledge you tireless efforts during the last 12 months in merging the varying opinions and positions of States Parties through your far reaching and wide global consultations. We hope that the momentum which you have enabled will enhance the much needed movement toward reaching an equitable and actionable consensus critically needed to ensure the preservation of the integrity of the NPT regime. We say this because the NPT remains and must continue to remain the cornerstone for the maintenance of international peace, security and global stability.
Mr President
We associate ourselves with the Statements delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Pacific Island Forum States (PIF). Both statements, if I may add, were most eloquently delivered by the distinguished Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Australia in their respective capacities as representatives of the two groups.
Mr President
We strongly encourage states which remain outside the NPT regime to join us. As the globe moves toward the aspiration of "a world without nuclear weapons" it is critical that ail states accede to the NPT regime. To do so would enable the universality of the NPT.
We, like many other member states, welcome the recent signing of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) between the USA and the Russian Federation.
Mr President
Papua New Guinea, like many small non-nuclear weapon states remains deeply concerned about the existence of nuclear weapons and their destructive force.
We therefore, join others in strongly reiterating the imperative for ensuring nonproliferation and disarmament by nuclear weapon States. In this respect while noting progress made by some nuclear weapon states to meet their Article VI obligations, we would call for and encourage them to make further progress In order to achieve our ultimate aim of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. President
There is a critical role pursuant to Article IV for the peaceful use of nuclear energy especially in its application for sustainable development Besides energy needs, the use of nuclear technology in areas of health and food production, for instance, could contribute to our collective humanity. We would also commend the Director of the IAEA for initiating and prioritizing the use of nuclear technology in the medical field especially in relation to the diagnosis and treatment of cancer.
However, while PIF members "fully support the rights of non-nuclear-weapon states to enjoy the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy" it has to be "within a framework that reduces proliferation risk and adheres to the highest international standards of safeguards, security and safety".
Furthermore, we agree with the PIF position that "(S)strengthened non-proliferation measures, including safeguards and compliance, help foster an environment conducive to sharing and enhancing the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy. These measures thereby facilitate rather than inhibit the development of peaceful nuclear energy".
Mr President
As part of the Pacific Region, Papua New Guinea along with other Pacific Countries enjoy a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone. We are pleased that the Rarotonga Treaty has been fully supported by many major nuclear weapon states. Additionally, we warmly welcome the announcement by Secretary Clinton at this Conference that the United States intends to ratify the Treaty. Indeed, this is heartening as it will allow other Pacific States who have not done so to consider ratification of the Rarotonga Treaty.
Mr President
Let me take this opportunity to commend to this Conference the report of the International Commission on Nuclear Non- Proliferation and Disarmament, titled: "Eliminating Nuclear Threats".
In conclusion, we believe every effort must be made to bring into force the provisions of the CTBT. While Papua New Guinea is not an Annex II Country it is now in the process of formally ratifying the CTBT which it has signed to previously. In this regard, let me also commend Indonesia for its intention to ratify the CTBT.
Thank you.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 2










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



