Mr. President:
Allow me to congratulate you on your election. It is particularly pleasing to see you directing our work because we are well acquainted with your professional skills, and because you represent Brazil, a country that Peru considers a friend. Believe me when I say that I understand the responsibility inherent in your position, since I was President of the Review Conference of the 1990 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, under similar circumstances as today's, that is to say under very difficult circumstances. Therefore, you can count on my full support, and to begin with, I will limit myself to the time allotted to my statement in this general debate.
We have a very specific responsibility. The result of our work could mean that this Review Conference will signal the beginning of a renewed process in matters of nuclear proliferation and disarmament, or in its defect, it could mark the beginning of the inertia that characterizes other important forums in matters of armament control and disarmament
Although Peru agrees with the declaration made by the Non-Aligned Movement, I believe it pertinent to point out what Peru expects this Conference to accomplish. For my country, the Conference must carry out a broad analysis of the integral process of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I mention process, because it is not just about evaluating its postulates and mechanisms in order to improve its compliance record, but process also encompasses analyzing the evolution of the agreements taken up by the preparatory committees as well as the Review Conferences, specially the 1995 and 2000 Conferences in which significant progress was made. To ignore these agreements would mean a serious setback. Therefore, we hope that the impasse in the agenda may be solved in a manner that will reflect this position in the work programme.
We also firmly believe that this Conference must put forth succinct results in the form of specific recommendations within a consensus document. We have to make very important decisions when facing non-compliance with the Treaty, by the nuclear superpowers and the agreements they had undertaken, as well as by the non-nuclear ones, in particular, those that would like to develop clandestine nuclear programs under the shelter of the right to use nuclear energy in a peaceful manner. In the aforementioned statement, we must take into account all the important sides in this issue, among them nuclear disarmament, negative security assurances and regional matters, including the establishment of the Middle East Zone of Peace.
We think it essential to have a dictum on the execution of the 13 steps towards disarmament taken in the 2000 Review Conference, specially with regards to the signing and ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the negotiation of a Treaty outlining the elimination and prohibition of fusible material, including effective mechanisms of verifications and the unrestricted application of the irreversibility principle as applied to nuclear disarmament.
We also believe it is of utmost importance that the Conference deals with the matter of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as a positive, definite step towards a general and comprehensive disarmament. Therefore, and also as an addendum to the Tlatelolco Treaty, my government has successively sponsored the declaration of the Andean and South American spaces as weapons of mass destruction free zones. These initiatives were acknowledged by the General Assembly in its resolutions on Zones of Peace of the South American and Andean Community.
Mr. President,
Peru shares most of the countries' concern at the lack or regulations of the Non- Proliferation Treaty, a Treaty which links countries in the case of nuclear technology acquisition by non-government individuals. The acquisition of radioactive sources for the purposes of detonating them with conventional explosives is an ever present danger. We are also concerned about the way in which we must face new international behavior, such as the fact that some countries who have developed nuclear technology under the shelter of the right to peaceful use of such energy, may later on intend to withdraw from the Treaty, disavowing their commitments to non-proliferation and disarmament.
We are facing a clear weakening of the judicial regime of non-proliferation and disarmament, two issues which to our point of view have to be kept linked since they feed off each other. To privilege one over another, as has been happening, will cause a negative unbalance of the legitimacy of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Mr. President,
In spite of its weaknesses, the Peruvian government continues to consider the Non- Proliferation Treaty as a fundamental instrument to avoid proliferation and to reach the final objective of comprehensive and total disarmament. We need to urgently reinforce its legitimacy, complying with, and enforcing compliance in an effective and decisive manner, the agreements we have undertaken. It is only through the negotiation of multilateral agreements that we will be able to resolve the current controversies and deficiencies.
We reaffirm the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency, as the only international agency in matters of nuclear verification. We support the efforts of this agency to improve its track record of accomplishing goals set, especially through additional safeguard protocols, which have already been signed by my country.
To conclude, I would like to state my country's commitment in this important process. In accordance to that, today we are presenting the National Report of Peru in which the fulfillment of our duties before the Treaty is reflected. You can count on our unwavering support to ensure the success of this Review Conference on the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Thank you

