Please check aaainst delivery
STATEMENT BY
H.E. LIBRAN N. CABACTULAN
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations, New York
General Debate
First Preparatory Committee Meeting of the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, Austria
30 April 2012
Introduction
Thank you for giving me the floor Mr. Chairman and for giving me the honor of
opening this meeting. The Philippines associates itself with the statement
delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I wish to congratulate you on your well-deserved election. You can count on my
delegation's support as you carry out your task. I also wish to commend you for
the very able way in which you have conducted this PrepCom. I urge the
Eastern European Group to resolve with dispatch the issue of Chairmanship for
the Second Preparatory Session of the 201 5 NPT Review Conference.
I speak no longer as a President of the Review Conference, but on behalf of a
faithful State Party to the NPT -- an act I was not able to do in the last Review
Conference, given my position. It was of the utmost importance that I, and
members of the Philippine delegation, maintain a sense of neutrality. Free of the
responsibility and burden of the Presidency, my delegation wishes to make plain
its views.
Rerrional Developments as thev relate to the NPT
On the recent developments in my region, I wish to refer specifically to the failed
test launch of a "satellite" as well as the successful launch of an ICBM with a
range of 3,100 miles by two separate countries in a span of a few weeks that has
raised concern of a budding arms race. This is occurring at a time when the
global economy remains fragile, when the focus should be cutting back spending
on arms and directing limited and scarce resources in reviving floundering
economies or providing basic necessities for their citizens.
Clinging to the flawed concept of deterrence wherein civilian-centers populated
by non-combatants are threatened with incineration and survivors with a lifetime
of suffering a slow death is inhumane and morally bankrupt and has no place in
our evolved society. Policies like the "no first use po1icy"from countries or those 
already announced on "negative security assurances" are of limited utility. What
will really be reassuring to us all is the non existence of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman, the latest developments in my region are not all negative. I would
like to commend my fellow ASEAN members and the five NWS for their positive
and constructive attitude during negotiations on the latter's accession to the
Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty. The negotiations in 201 1 paved the way for the
NWS to accede to the Protocol upon the completion of certain procedures. With
this breakthrough, we in ASEAN look forward to the completion of these agreed
procedures to allow the NWS to sign the Protocol in 2012 and to enable the
Protocol to enter into force at the earliest opportunity.
64 Point Action Plan
On the 64 Point Action Plan, I wish to stress that all action points must be
implemented. We were fully awake when we all agreed to that, but verily by
doing so, we are fulfilling our obligations under the NPT. Let me highlight the key
elements in some action points.
First are those in actions 3 and 5, and the words and phrases to focus on are "...
the nuclear weapon States commit to undertake further efforts to reduce and
ultimately eliminate all types of nuclear weapons ..." and "The nuclear weapon
States commit to accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear
Disarmament ..." Please note also that these phrases are linked to the
commitment undertaken by the nuclear weapon states in 2000 NPT Review
Conference for an unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of
their nuclear arsenals.
The message I am conveying is the fact that we have firmly in place
commitments and agreements for the total elimination of nuclear weapons. We
really do not need more words or phrases; if at all, we may need to have a
definitive time frame for the total elimination of nuclear weapons to happen or
agree already to start the negotiations of multilateral treaty referred to in article VI
of NPT.
In any case, by 2014 and as also stated in action point 5, the nuclear weapon
States are called upon to report their undertakings to the Preparatory Committee
in 2014. Action 5 then concluded by saying that the 2015 NPT Review
Conference will take stock and consider the next step for the full implementation
of Article VI of NPT.
Action points 20 and 21 are the other elements of 64 Point Action Plan that I
would like to highlight. My Delegation wishes to remind the States Parties of the
requirement in action 20 to submit a report on the implementation of the Action
Plan. Similarly, my Delegation expects that the nuclear weapon States will soon 
provide the standard form of their report and the interval of reporting, as they are
encouraged to do so under action 21.
1995 Resolution on the Middle East
The Philippines has always given importance to the establishment of nuclear
weapon free zones and supports their creation. We hope to see very soon the
accession of all nuclear power States to the Protocol of the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapons Free Zone, and we hope that a process may soon commence
for the establishment of a zone free of nuclear and other WMD in the Middle
East. In this regard the Philippines commends the States from the region, the
depository States of the 1995 Resolution together with the Secretary General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and the Government of Finland, first for providing the venue for
the 2012 Middle East Conference, as well as for nominating Undersecretary
Jaakko Laajava to the very important post of facilitator. The Philippines
welcomes Ambassador Laajava's detailed consultations with the key potential
participants to this conference - the Arab states, Iran and Israel - to ensure the
success of the Conference. The creation of the zone is long overdue and the
2012 Middle East Conference will lay the groundwork for the zone's eventual
establishment. It will be a long and difficult process for sure, but States
concerned must persevere, for success in this endeavor could lead to the
achievement of the durable and lasting peace that Statesmen and diplomats
have sought since 1948.
In closing, Mr. Chairman I wish to remind all of us gathered here that after
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the world was fortunate to avoid a nuclear holocaust for
60 years and hopefully for many more years to come, but let us not continue to
tempt the fates. The spread of nuclear weapons and the improvement and
proliferation of missile technology means that what we avoided back then could
occur today and this assumption is based on the exponentially growing number
of countries that could get their hands on the nuclear weapon and a viable longrange
delivery system. We cannot always rely on the goodwill of men to assure
our continued survival as a race as we did in 1962. The only way to ensure the
prevention of a nuclear holocaust is to take away the nuclear option from the
hands of men who are so fallible. We must therefore strive with even greater
effort during this review cycle, especially on the pillars of nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 