STATEMENT
H.E. LIBRAN N. CABACTULAN
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations, New York
General Debate
Second Preparatory Committee Meeting of the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Geneva, Switzerland
22 April 2013
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Philippines aligns itself with the statement delivered by our
esteemed colleague from Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Let me applaud you on your election as Chairman of this very important Preparatory Committee
Meeting which comes at a time when the world is being threatened by crises and challenges we
have all been trying to avoid.
Your task, our task, in the next two weeks will undoubtedly be daunting and the Philippine
delegation commits to stand beside you and extend to you our full support and cooperation.
Regional Challenges
Mr. Chairman,
Recent developments in the Middle East and in the Korean Peninsula not only pose threats to
international peace and security, but to the credibility and effectiveness of the Nuclear NonProliferation
Treaty (NPT) as well.
As we have stressed many times, the failure to convene the Conference on the Establishment
of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in
2012, in accordance with the 2010 NPT Review Conference Outcome Document, may have
serious implications on the next NPT RevCon and even to the Treaty itself.
While some argue that the issue on the Middle East is but one component of the 2010 NPT
RevCon Outcome Document, the Philippines wishes to underscore that this specific provision is
crucial. The 2012 Conference will be an important first step in our efforts to implement the
Resolution on the Middle East from the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference.
The Philippines reiterates its call on the United Nations Secretary-General and the three cosponsors
of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East, as well as the Facilitator and the countries
in the region, to exert utmost efforts to ensure that a conference is held at the soonest time
possible, following the elements of the 2010 NPT RevCon Outcome Document.
If NPT States Parties will continue to defy the Treaty and its related documents, we weaken the
Treaty and with it, our efforts and resolve to achieve our goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons.
We hope that we will devote ample time in the second PrepCom to discuss this important issue
and come up with possible solutions. We look forward to the presentation by the Facilitator of
the Middle East Conference, Ambassador Jaakko Laajava, during this session.
The Philippines is also deeply concerned over persistent threats by the Democratic People’ s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) to launch nuclear attacks on its neighbour, the Republic of Korea,
and the United States.
We call for sobriety among all stakeholders and for the easing of tension in the region to avoid
the loss of innocent lives. We also join calls on the DPRK to desist from continuing these acts
of provocation and to abandon all nuclear weapons and programs.
In our own backyard, members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) still
await the signature and ratification of the P-5 on the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty. While
ASEAN welcomes continued consultations with the nuclear weapon states, we would like to see
their accession to the Protocol as soon as possible.
NPT and International Humanitarian Law
Mr. Chairman,
There are over 40,000 Filipinos living and working in South Korea and 3.4 million in the US who
will be affected by a possible nuclear attack.
The Philippines has always maintained that nuclear weapons are illegal under international law,
particularly international humanitarian law. Of all the weapons ever conceived, nuclear 
weapons are inherently indiscriminate, far beyond proportionality, unimaginable in unnecessary
suffering, and inescapably and grievously harmful to the environment. It is a weapon where the
notion of control is meaningless and the idea of military necessity absurd.
The issue of operational readiness or accidental nuclear war and the issue of catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons are inextricably intertwined. These will
possibly be the two most critical issues for human survival over the short to medium term.
The use of nuclear weapons may come also about by inadvertence. The other possible causes
of a catastrophic nuclear weapons exchange could be via malfunction, misinformation or
miscalculation. It is our responsibility to take efforts to prevent such incidents from happening.
The “ Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions” of the 2010 NPT RevCon
Outcome Document states:
“ The Conference expresses deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and reaffirms the need for all
States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law.”
NPT States Parties underscored their deep concern for the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and that any use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons would be inconsistent with fundamental rules of international humanitarian law, as
stated in the Chairman’ s factual summary for the first PrepCom for the 2015 NPT RevCon.
It is for these reasons that the Philippines welcomes the HYPERLINK
"http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/ud/selected-topics/humanitarianefforts/humimpact_2013.html?id=708603"international
conference on the humanitarian impact
of nuclear weapons which was hosted by Norway last March. The conference concluded that
the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapon use would be unacceptable and urged States to
begin the work to outlaw these weapons. We also welcome the follow-up meeting to be hosted
by Mexico at a future date.
Implementing Commitments, Reviewing Progress
There is no doubt that prospects are bleak as progress in nuclear disarmament is currently
stalled, especially with unfavorable regional developments.
It is in our collective interest to ensure that the Conclusions and Recommendations for Followon
Actions of the 2010 NPT RevCon Outcome Document are implemented.
While we are in the thick of preparatory work for the 2015 NPT RevCon, the Philippines wishes
to reiterate that we should strive to implement all the action points contained in the 64-point
action plan.
The Philippines reiterates the need to have a definitive timeframe in the implementation of
commitments by nuclear weapon states, as contained in Actions 3 and 5.
The Philippines welcomes the New START Treaty and believes its full implementation would
serve as a good catalyst for progress. While both sides have shared information on the initial
efforts undertaken such as inspections and information sharing since the Treaty’ s entry into
force in February 2011, concrete reciprocal reductions they intend to make under specific
timetables would send a strong signal to the international community that they remain firmly
committed to reductions.
We would also welcome a fresh round of bilateral negotiations between the US and Russia on
further nuclear weapon reductions.
In this session of our preparatory work, the Philippines also looks forward to the report by the
nuclear weapon states on their disarmament undertakings as stated in Action 5.
The Philippines also hopes to hear from the nuclear weapon states on the ongoing P5
conference. Discussions could hopefully move beyond confidence building and go into real and
substantive issues.
Nuclear Weapons Convention
Mr. Chairman,

Now is also the time to set in motion negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention (NWC).
Some argue that a NWC would move the focus away from the NPT. On the contrary, it could 
get the ball rolling as it ensures full implementation of the NPT.
A NWC is the only comprehensive, universal and non-discriminatory way towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. An international conference can be held in the near future that
will set the parameters for the elimination of nuclear weapons and prohibit their production,
stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use, and provide for the destruction of such weapons within
a specified timeframe or timeline.
The upcoming High Level Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament would be a good opportunity to
drum up support for such a Convention. I urge States that have provided us with a model NWC
to take the lead once again in jumpstarting discussions for a NWC.
In closing, the Philippines looks forward to a productive preparatory session that will not only
review progress made over the last two years, but one that will also pave the way forward
through new ideas and solutions to our present challenges.
Thank you.
Please check against delivery
PAGE 1