Check aqainst delivery
Permanent Mlss~on
of the Republ~c of Poland
to the Un~ted Nahons Office
and lnternahonai Organlzahons
in V~enna
The Preparatory Committee
to the 2015 NPT Review Conference
STATEMENT
H.E. Przemystaw GRUDZINSKI
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations
Office and International Organizations in Vienna
Head of Polish Delegation
Vienna, April 3oth, 2012 
Vienna, April 3oth, 2012
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset of my intervention let me congratulate you on your
appointment as the Chair of the first session of the Preparatory Committee to
the 2015 NPT Review conference. I wish to assure you, Mr. Chairman, of the
Polish Delegation's full support and cooperation in the discharge of your
important mandate.
I should also like to take this opportunity to extend congratulations to the
other members of the Committee's Bureau.
Mr. Chairman,
Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered by H.E. Maria
Marinaki on behalf of the European Union.
The condition of the nuclear non-proliferation regime has been
strengthened by the consensus outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
and entry into force of the new START agreement. There is no doubt that these
positive developments have contributed to restoring confidence in the nonproliferation
regime. They have also raised the expectations of international
community regarding the results of the new review cycle. It is our joint
responsibility of all NPT member states to dully address the remaining
challenges related to the three pillars of the Treaty.
The most critical issues are nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
including cases of non-compliance with the Treaty provisions and the creation
of Weapons of Mass Destruction free zone in the Middle East. 
Mr. Chairman,
Progress in nuclear disarmament is of utmost importance for the
regime's future. The 2010 NPT Review Conference proposed certain actions in
that regard. The key issue for Poland is to address "the question of all nuclear
weapons regardless of their type and location" - that is so called tactical
nuclear weapons, which in contrast to the strategic nuclear arsenals have not
been covered by any legally binding arms control agreement.
A world free of nuclear weapons cannot be achieved without making nonstrategic
weapons an integral part of the general nuclear disarmament process.
Minister Sikorski together with his Swedish counterpart - Minister Carl Bild
made it clear in their op-ed published in February 2010.
We hope that nuclear weapon states will build on the positive experience
of the new START Treaty and include the category of tactical nuclear weapons in
their future reduction talks.
Before we reach this stage, it is important to lay the foundations for any
future reductions by enhancing the transparency of existing nuclear arsenals
and increasing mutual confidence. The 2010 NPT Conference committed the
nuclear weapon states (NWS) to report on their progress in that regard. In due
course of this PrepCom Poland together with the member states of the Nonproliferation
and Disarmament Initiative will present a working document on
this topic.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing. One
cannot progress with nuclear disarmament without strengthening nuclear nonproliferation
policies and improving verification mechanisms. The irreversible
nuclear disarmament and the diminishing role of the nuclear weapons in NWS,
can be used as an argument to discourage potential proliferators from acquiring
these destructive weapons.
Non-proliferation is also important for upholding the integrity of the NPT.
In view of the disturbing information on non-compliance of states with their 
non-proliferation obligations this issue should remain very high on the agenda.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and its safeguards system
play a central role in that regard. Therefore Poland firmly advocates for
universalization of the additional protocol agreements.
Mr. Chairman,
The 1995 NPT Resolution on the Middle East became the core issue during
the 2010 Review Conference and it will also be at the forefront of the current
review cycle debate. We hope that all interested states of the region will be
able to participate in the conference that is to be held in Finland under auspices
of the UN Secretary General. Their involvement is crucial to start the process
leading to the creation of the WMD free zone, which should serve the interests
of all countries in the region.
Mr. Chairman,
As we launch the new NPT cycle we can assume with some certainty that
the road to the 2015 Review Conference will not be without bumps and
obstacles. In fact differences and diverging views on the most critical issues are
well known to everybody. Poland sincerely hopes that the upcoming debates
during the current and future Preparatory Committee meetings will be
conducted in a constructive way. Only by taking into account each others'
interests and making an effort to find a common ground, we can ensure the
success of this review cycle.
Thank you for your attention. 