PORTUGAL
Statement by
Mrs. Cristina Pucarinho, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Portugal to the United Nations
Alternate Head of Delegation of Portugal to the
Third Preparatory Committee of the Revision Conference of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, New York, 29 May 2014
http I www u 1 nllportugal I PERMANENT MISSION OF PORTUGAL TO Tl-jf' UN I 866 2ND AVE- 9Trl FlOOR NE'W YORK NY 10017 
Mr. President,
At the outset, I congratulate you on your appointment as President
of this Preparatory Committee. I am confident that under your able
leadership, we will be promoting the goals of the TNP with decisions
that can foster a lasting consensus. I also would like to extend my
wishes of good cooperation to all participants in the Committee.
Mr. President,
We are gathered for the third time to prepare the Conference in
2015, which we do hope will contribute (/ quote) "to avert the
danger of a nuclear war and to take measures to safeguard the
security of peoples" (end of quote). The Non-Proliferation Treaty
remains the basis of the non-proliferation regime and, therefore, its
three pillars of non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy must be equally promoted, as they are altogether
the object and purpose of the Treaty.
Following on the positive outcome of the two first Preparatory
Committees, we are confident this meeting will succeed defining an
agenda and a program of work for the 2015 Conference, which can
lead to a valuable outcome of that important event.
The 2010 Action Plan, which was agreed by all participants in the
2010 Review Conference, sets the work for the following years and
the goals to be achieved. Some of its benchmarks are still to be
achieved and we are convinced that in order to succeed in the near
future, a renewed commitment and the engagement of all of us is
required.
Mr. President,
We call on all States that are still not party to accede to the Treaty
as non-nuclear States, thus contributing for the reinforcement of the
non-proliferation regime inaugurated in 1968. A world free of
nuclear weapons - the major goal of the NPT -remains a collective
major aspiration to basically guarantee the preservation of
humanity. Portugal believes it is an ambitious but attainable goal,
requiring therefore the commitment of all of us.
2 
As far as disarmament is concerned, we acknowledge the
progresses made since 2010 regarding Article VI. We remain
convinced that progress will linger on the agenda of the States
involved. We are of the view that the starting of negotiations of a
Treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices (FMCT) would be an
important step forward, meaning that negotiations would finally
start and that the stalemate of 19 years of the Conference on
Disarmament would see a breakthrough. The Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is a benchmark which must be equally
triggered by all.
As regards nuclear proliferation, we remain very concerned with the
actual status quo involving DPRK and Syria. On Iran, we welcome
the progresses in the JPA (Joint Plan of Action) and AIEA
negotiation framework. Moreover, the ongoing ballistic and missile
programs in North Korea, Syria and Iran add up to the international
concern over its potential use in their respective nuclear programs.
As many others we believe that the IAEA comprehensive safeguards
regime, including its additional protocol, is a fundamental
instrument in the non-proliferation efforts and the verification
standards. Moreover, the logic of progression established by the
Treaty must be retained, as any breach of the safeguards means a
breach of article III and therefore the deprivation of the rights
guaranteed by article IV.
The negative assurances created by the zones free of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems have an added value in
the non proliferation regime and in this regard we endeavour, in
particular, the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East. We
have been supporting all parties involved in the negotiations,
specially the efforts of the facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko Laajava.
Mr. President,
We support the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to
develop research, production and to the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with the
Treaty provisions. In this regard and however the primary role lies
3 
with States Parties, it must be stressed the importance of keeping
the nuclear energy issues in an inclusive multilateral framework,
notably those regarding safety and security issues.
Portugal is actively engaged in a number of relevant nuclear security
initiatives, notably the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), the IAEA
Safety Action Plan, the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan 2014-2017 and
the 2013 IAEA International Conference on Nuclear Security:
Enhancing Global Efforts at the Agency's Headquarters. We believe
the AIEA should have the leading role in nuclear security beyond
national competences.
The IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) launched in 2010, to which
Portugal contributes through the EU, should deserve an enhanced
attention by all States Parties as it supports activities that otherwise
could be problematic to pursue.
In the eve of the 2015 Revision Conference of the NPT it is worth
recalling some of the remaining challenges worldwide that could be
addressed, such as: cyber security, the reliability of early warning
systems, the possibility of miscalculation or a decision based in
wrong information by the national command authorities and, finally,
the implementation of measures to reduce the proliferation risks.
Thank you, Mr President.
4 