His Excellency, Libran N. Cabactulan, Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations and Chair man of the Review Conference of Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
His Excellency, Ban Ki-moon, Secretary General of the United Nations,
I would like at the outset to congratulate you on your election for the chairmanship of this important Conference, which is held against the backdrop of unprecedented development and challenges that hinder the international efforts to rein the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and a mounting tendency to possess nuclear know-how and technology for peaceful use. I would like, also, to congratulate the members of the bureau on their election, and wish them success in leading our work towards reaching a positive and concrete outcome for the Conference that lives up to the expectations of the international community and peace-loving countries. A consensus is more likely to reinvigorate our work, which has not met with the desired success in the preparatory meetings. We confirm our full support to reach a consensus in the deliberations of this historic Conference. 1 would like, also, to commend the efforts exerted by the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary General of the United Nations and the High Representative for disarmament, and I thank them for their statements. I also seize this opportunity to welcome H.E. Yukiya Amano, The Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). I align-myself with the statement delivered by the head of Delegation^ of Egypt on behalf of the NAM countries that are parties in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, as well as with the statement of the distinguished Permanent Representative of Lebanon on Behalf of the Arab Group. -v-
Mr, President, J :
J
Nuclear disarmament comes at the top of priorities on the global agenda for disarmament. We hold the Review Conference of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, at a time when some of the five nuclear States still refuse to implement the most important articles of the Treaty, namely, to stop developing their nuclear arsenals and reduce them, whereas other countries are still not parties of the Treaty, and others conclude agreements outside the framework of the Treaty. We call for the process of review to be undertaken in light of the decisions made in the previous two conferences (1995/2000) for the review and the indefinite extension of the Treaty, and urge all States to take practical and sincere steps in this regard. Notwithstanding the existence of some bilateral arrangements between some nuclear States, the indispensable legal requirement of the treaty is to achieve full nuclear disarmament. We stress the importance that the Conference adopt the Action Plan of the States Parties to eliminate nuclear weapons, which was presented by the Non-Aligned Movement. In the meantime, we must urgently reach a binding international instrument to assure non- nuclear states against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
The State of Qatar is keen to strengthen the Nuclear-Non-Proliferation Treaty and activate its underpinnings, namely non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In this regard, we stress the inviolability of the right of States Patties to acquire nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, and that no obstacles should be put in the way of non-nuclear States Parties to the Treaty in their quest to develop nuclear capabilities for peaceful purposes. The State of Qatar supports the early implementation of the Comprehensive Test- Ban Treaty. Both the Declaration of the Arab summit held in Doha on 30 March last year, and the Arab summit held in Sirle, Libya, in March of this year stressed this principles.
It is indispensable to activate the resolution of 1995 011 the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and to take practical measures for its implementation. This resolution, which was reaffirmed in the resolution of the Review Conference in 2000 and re-emphasized in the Arab summits, was adopted in exchange of the indefinite extension of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the accession of ail Arab States to it. It is imperative that States Parties of the Treaty, especially the three nuclear-weapon States that have adopted the resolution, break silence towards Israel's continuous nuclear policy, which violates the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and pushes the entire region into an arms race that endangers regional and international security. This is especially true after the adoption by the -•International Atomic Energy Agency of resolutions 16 and 17 of 2009 on the !-"application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East and Israel's nuclear capabilities, e vi if, Otherwise, the Arab countries will consider a range, of alternatives in light of the response of this Review Conference and the international community to the Arabs' demand to turn the Middle East into a nuclear weapon-free-zone, and consider those alternatives at the"' Arab summit in 2011. Israel's accession to the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty will enhance the confidence necessary to find solutions to the many problems of the Middle East, The States Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty have the sovereign right to consider whether or not to continue to be part of the Treaty in accordance with Article X of it. Similarly, the States Parties have the sovereign right to consider whether or not to join the Model Protocol Additional, since acceding to it is optional rather than mandatory.
Mr. President,
In January last year, the State of Qatar signed the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Small Quantities Protocol with the International Atomic Energy Agency. In terms of the national machinery, the task of monitoring the implementation of the Convention is entrusted to a committee established for that purpose in 2004, which includes representatives from relevant State bodies. The State of Qatar also hosts workshops and events to promote training and share expertise in the field of the application of international instruments on the prohibition of weapons of all kinds, including nuclear weapons, the elimination of nuclear terrorism and the fight against
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Some of these workshops were organized in cooperation with the Security Council of the United Nations. The State of Qatar enacts national legislation to implement its obligations in the field of disarmament and international security, and it trains national cadres and fosters media awareness of the implementation and verification.
Mr. President,
In conclusion, I join the previous speakers in calling on all States to abide by their obligations in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and to intensify international consultations so that we can collectively contribute to promoting a global climate conducive to security and stability. We hope that we will not wait long before we celebrate a universal Treaty for disarmament and prohibition of nuclear weapons, for this has legal and political importance.
Thank you










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



