Mr President, Ladies and gentlemen,
For Romania, the NPT is an essential instrument of collective security. The three interconnected pillars of the treaty represent the adequate framework for preserving and strengthening international peace and security while, at the same time, benefiting from peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. Personally, I believe that it is in everyone's interest to support the treaty, to preserve its integrity and validity, and to further strengthen it.
Energy is essential for human development. The Government of Romania is of the opinion that nuclear energy has the potential to be a reliable, sustainable and environmentally friendly energy source, provided that any use of nuclear energy is beneficial, responsible and sustainable.
Romania has been a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency since April 1957. We have been a state party to the NPT since March 1970. Since 1972, we have had a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA, reinforced by the Additional Protocol of 2000. Romania started implementing the IAEA integrated safeguards system in June 2007, and this is presently applied to all the main facilities of the nuclear fuel cycle. The integrated safeguards system ensures real-time monitoring of the activities developed in the nuclear facilities, and the transfer of nuclear materials between them.
The national nuclear program was started at the end of the 50's; a Soviet-designed research reactor was commissioned in 1957. The reactor was used in various research and development activities and for radioisotopes production. The Romanian Government decided to have it permanently shut down in 1997, after 40 years of activity, and it was subsequently decommissioned.In 1973 a cooperation agreement was signed between Romania and the IAEA with a view to establishing a Research Reactor Project: the US - origin dual-core TRIGA training and research reactor and its associated facilities.
Cooperation with the IAEA has led to one of the most successful activities in this field: the full conversion of the TRIGA reactor from highly enriched to low enriched uranium fuel. The project was finalised in 2006, and it is worth mentioning that this was the most powerful TRIGA reactor in the world to undergo such a conversion. Presently, the necessary low enriched uranium fuel is supplied by CERCA, France, the spent low enriched uranium fuel being returned to the country of origin.
The Romanian Nuclear Research Program assures the necessary technical support for operating the nuclear power plant in Cernavoda, alongside the development of various non- power applications in health care, agriculture, industry and other peaceful R&D activities. Romania built two nuclear power reactors based on a cooperation agreement concluded in 1977 with Canada. The first reactor became operational in 1996, and the second in 2007.
The Romanian Government has recently decided to resume building two additional reactors in Cernavoda which was halted in 1990. These units replicate the design of the first two reactors, but they incorporate additional improvements to meet the latest applicable Codes and Standards.
Mr President, Ladies and gentlemen,
Please allow me to stress again that the safeguards system is the instrument by which Romania accepts the control applied by the IAEA to all nuclear raw materials and special fissionable materials. These are materials used in all peaceful nuclear-related activities on our territory or under Romanian jurisdiction or control. The sole purpose of this system is to allow the verification of the fact that these materials are not diverted to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices ~ related activities.
The most recent assessments of the Agency, as well as its unannounced inspections to the national facilities have concluded that the nuclear materials in Romania are used only for peaceful purposes and that there are no undeclared activities involving nuclear materials.
The international cooperation with and technical assistance from the International Agency for Atomic Energy were, are and will continue to be instrumental for developing our national nuclear program. Romania has benefited from international support while it has committed itself to fully implement the safeguards agreement and the Additional Protocol. These instruments are meant
3
to help sustaining a safe and secure use of nuclear energy and to eliminate the risks of proliferation, illicit use and trade of sensitive materials. It is in the interest of all states that the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements together with the Additional Protocol become the IAEA verification standard.
The physical protection, safety and security aspects are key elements of the non-proliferation regime, and my Government is determined to address them with due responsibility and awareness. A major objective was to ensure an adequate regulatory framework to verify compliance with legal requirements. A series of training courses and seminars, with national and regional attendance, were organized in Romania during the last few years with the aim of improving the capacity for upgrading the nuclear security of the infrastructure and of strengthening the physical protection of nuclear installations against sabotage. There were also workshops in cooperation with the IAEA designed to improve measures in the field of preventing, detecting and reacting to terrorist attacks against nuclear infrastructure.
Romania also benefited from the Tripartite Initiative (a US - Russian Federation - IAEA programme) in order to return both fresh and spent fuel from Russian designed research reactors abroad. As the Working Paper 3 explains, all the highly enriched uranium of Russian origin was removed from the Romanian territory in 2009. It was a joint operation: Romania, the United States, the Russian Federation and the IAEA contributed to the success of this activity aimed at securing vulnerable materials. I have to mention as well that, under the auspices of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative, all the spent highly enriched uranium fuel from the TRIGA research reactor was returned to the United States, the country of origin, also in 2009.
Mr President, Ladies and gentlemen,
Before ending my intervention, I would like to appeal to all states parties to show flexibility, to look beyond national or even regional interests, and to make way for a larger picture of peace, security and prosperity for the present and future generations.
As Mahatma Gandhi said "honest disagreements are usually a healthy sign of progress". We should not fear the differences of opinion, but we should keep in mind that a positive outcome of our meeting will show true political will in dealing successfully with nuclear disarmament, non- proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear power.
In conclusion, Mr President, I would like to assure you of my delegation's commitment to participating constructively in the upcoming debates and negotiations and to support you and your Bureau in achieving a successful outcome of this session.
Thank you.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 2

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



