Statement by
H.E. Mr. Cristian Istrate, Permanent Representative of Romania
to International Organizations in Vienna
at the 2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
General Debate
Mr. Chairman,
Excellences,
Distinguished delegates,
(Viena, 2 May 2017)
Allow me first to extend to you my most sincere congratulations for your appointment at
the helm of the first Preparatory Committee of 2020 NPT Review Conference, and to
assure you of the Romanian delegation's full support. Your outstanding diplomatic skills,
thorough preparedness of this session and teamwork with the next Chair - Poland and the
Secretariat are excellent prerequisites of a successful PrepCom.
Romania associates with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I will,
therefore, limit myself to a few brief points in national capacity.
Since its entry into force, the NPT has been the cornerstone ofthe nuclear nonproliferation
regime. All States Parties benefit from the nonproliferation measures undertaken in
accordance with the Treaty, as well as the drive towards nuclear disarmament. Their
development is sustained by progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We are all
bound by a genuine interest in strengthening the Treaty's three pillars. Much has been
1 
done to implement and reinforce the NPT, but there is still a lot to be accomplished and
we must relentlessly commit ourselves to this task.
At the beginning of a new review cycle, we should seize the opportunity to ensure the
solid confidence in the effectiveness of the NPT. The Treaty is far too important to be
held hostage to impractical approaches that will drive us apart from consensus and
endanger its very raison d'efre. The only realistic way forward is to encourage a positive
dynamic and apply the right strategies to further enhance the review process.
Mr. Chairman,
Our common goal of total nuclear disarmament must be addressed collectively, in an
appropriate step-by-step manner, in accordance with the security challenges and treaty
commitments of all NPT Parties and only when the international security environment
warrants it. Any effort regarding nuclear disarmament must be considered in the
framework of the NPT, avoiding unrealistic expectations that put at risk the nonproliferation
regime, undermine the credibility of the Treaty and, ultimately, our shared
goal of a nuclear weapons-free world.
Meanwhile, lets us look forward and focus, in a constructive and realistic manner, on
achieving common ground to advance towards a world without nuclear weapons, through
progress in FMCT negotiations, nuclear disarmament verification and the urgent entry
into force of the C1BT.
It has been a great honor for Romania to preside over the Preparatory Commission of the
CTBT in 2016, the year of its 20th anniversary. Last June, ministers and other high
officials of the Signatory States met here in Vienna to express support for the entry into
force of the Treaty 20 years since it was opened for signature. Once in force, the Treaty
would contribute effectively to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in
all its aspects, to the process of nuclear disarmament and therefore to the enhancement of
international peace and security. We have to finish what we started, against the backdrop
2 
of more DPRK's nuclear and ballistic tests in the recent past, and wonying signals about
the future.
Mr. Chairman,
NPT Parties share a responsibility to reinforce the global nuclear nonproliferation regime,
in particular to overcome the challenges posed by a few countries that have violated their
respective international obligations. Our common security would be profoundly affected
if additional countries crossed the nuclear threshold.
We welcome the progress that has been made in the implementation of the JCPOA
provisions, and commend all parties involved for their good-will and hard work. The role
of the lAEA remains essential, and, in this respect, Romania has made a voluntary
financial contribution to the lAEA's extra-budgetary fund for verification activities
required to monitor the implementation of the JCPOA.
The Middle East deserves a comprehensive solution, including the elimination of all
categories of weapons of mass destruction and a peace settlement in the region. We must
draw the lessons from the last review cycle: continued, constructive and united effort,
involving all the countries in the region, is needed to achieve this objective.
Developments over the past years have underscored the critical role ofthe implementation
of the lAEA comprehensive safeguards agreements and Additional Protocol, which
represent the verification standard that strengthens the IAEA's capabilities to detect and
respond to suspicions of non-compliance. For this reason, Romania supports the universal
adoption and implementation of the Additional Protocol.
It is our strong belief that in the field of nuclear security there is no room for complacency.
Against the backdrop of growing security threats at global, regional and national levels,
the challenges posed by nuclear terrorism require ever-more concerted actions. It is
therefore imperative that all aspects of nuclear security, including cyber security and
3 
nuclear forensics, should receive equal attention and appropriate funding by all Member
States.
On its side, Romania fully participates in the international efforts aimed at preventing
nuclear terrorism, and welcomes the role played by the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) in this respect. Romania, in cooperation with GICNT and
INTERPOL, organized the regional Exercise OLYMPUS, in October 2016, to address
challenges related to a nuclear security incident, and to identify strategies and best
practices for overcoming these challenges. As follow-up to Exercise Olympus, Romania
is planning to organize, in close collaboration with the GICNT, a practical exercise
focused on nuclear forensics.
We believe, indeed, that nuclear forensics require more political attention, as well as
strengthening the national capabilities. In view of that, two more agreements - a Practical
Agreement with IAEA, and an Amendment to the existing Collaboration Agreement with
the European Union Joint Research Center/JRC dedicated to strengthening scientific
collaboration between JRC Karlsruhe and IFIN-HH - will be signed in the near future.
Let me take this opportunity to invite you all to attend the side-event on Nuclear
Detectives to the Rescue: The Role of Nuclear Forensics in the Fight against Nuclear
Terrorism, hosted by Romania and partners on4 May2017, at 09.00, in MOlOO, in order
to promote a better understanding of nuclear forensic science.
Mr. Chairman,
Romania has established itself as a responsible actor, which uses nuclear energy
exclusively for peaceful purposes. We have a tradition of proactive commitments in
international cooperation projects, becoming one of the main regional providers of
training on peaceful uses of nuclear energy and always ready to share our experience of
over 60 years of activity in the nuclear field.
4 
In this respect, Romania and the IAEA signed, in 2015, a "Practical Arrangements" on
the scientific and technical cooperation in the field of nuclear safety. Following this, the
Institute for Nuclear Research of Pite~tiIRomania and the Agency are organizing training
for the benefit ofIAEA member states in such fields as nuclear research reactors; nuclear
safety; or technical and practical preparations for emergency situations.
Mr. Chairman,
Romania has had the privilege and honour to serve, during the last review cycle, as Chair
of the Second Preparatory Committee in Geneva, in 2013, and the Main Committee II
during the 2015 NPT Review Conference. This has been an opportunity to serve the
common goal of upholding the non-proliferation regime, while accumulating an
experience that could be of certain use in order to enhance the efficiency of the present
review cycle.
Institutional, transparent, balanced and - I underline - inclusive approach paid off then,
as it should now! We need more continuity between PrepComs and the RevCon,
considering the possibility of your report, Mr. Chairman, to form the negotiating base at
the beginning of the second PrepCom: the "rolling text" factor. The Bureau has to be
constituted and start working earlier than last time in order to properly steer the process.
Transfer of experience and lessons learned from the previous review cycle would be
welcome, and I for one stand ready to contribute.
On the eve of a new review cycle, let me say this: our debates do not take place in a
vacuum; this room is not isolated from the outside world. The NPT is part of a broader
security landscape. While the review process will be, once more, influenced by
developments elsewhere, we should resist temptations to politicize it. Instead, we have to
assume the responsibilities that come alongside benefits brought to us by the Treaty and
advance wherever we can in strengthening the global non-proliferation regime. Time will
tell that we were right!
5 
In closing, Mr. Chainnan, I would like to assure you once again of Romania' s support in
your endeavors to achieve a successful outcome of the first session of the Preparatory
Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
6 