HOCTO5IHHOe flpe,1CTaBHTeJThCTBO Permanent Mission
PocdHcKo eepawi of th Russian Fedcr’thon
HH Me)K,yHapOHMX i to the International
opraawix B BeHe Organizations
in Vienna
‘Qt)Lc’’i ‘11’LL”
Chech a’ainst deIn’er
STATEMENT
by Mikhail I.Uliyanov
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
at the First Session
of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, May 2, 2017
2
Mr. Chairman,
Colleagues,
We are starting the next NPT review cycle in rather difficult circumstances. The
Treaty is still facing serious challenges. Of course there were problems before hut in
recent years they have become particularly visible. We observe the increasing
radicalization of approaches to nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and even
to peaceful uses of nuclear energy. NPT-relevant issues are being discussed at alternative
fora with work there arranged not on the basis of mutually respectful dialogue and the
rule of consensus as it is the case in the framework of the NPT, but on simple voting. The
current situation does not contribute to the integrity and viability of the Treaty which
makes us look into its future with concern.
Nevertheless, the NPT which will mark its fiftieth anniversary next year
continues to be a pillar of the global strategic stability. It deserves to be titled the
cornerstone of the modern system of international security. The “founding fathers” of
the Treaty managed to find such solutions that have been repeatedly tested and they
still ensure an effective response to modern challenges. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme clearly confirms that. The
agreement was reached mostly thanks to the fact that it is based on the NPT and the
balance of rights and obligations stipulated in it.
The strengthening of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime has always
been one of the priorities of the Russian foreign policy.
A balanced approach of the NPT States Parties to all its three pillars — prevention
of nuclear proliferation, peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear disarmament — is
the pledge of its long term effective functioning. Unfortunately, in recent years this
balance has been disturbed. In the framework of review cycles, disarmament aspects are
prioritized while issues of non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are
being pushed to the sidelines. It is high time to address this imbalance.
3
We would like first of all to highlight the peaceful uses, especially since it has
become a tradition to start a review cycle in Vienna, where the IAEA headquarters are
located. According to its Statute, the objective of the Agency is to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world,
Russia not only in words but also in deeds consistently supports the IAEA efforts in this
field. The Agency’s unique experience and best practices, as well as the unprecedented
results make it the most influential platform in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. We attach particular importance to further strengthening the potential of the
Agency by providing necessary expertise and material resources to it, On our part, we do
a lot in that regard. We support the broad access of the NPT States Parties to the benefits
of peaceful uses.
Mr. Chairman,
Full-fledged development of nuclear energy is impossible without a reliable
nuclear non-proliferation regime. Its effective implementation is ensured by the IAEA
safeguards system. The efforts to improve the IAEA safeguards system should be
arranged in such a way that it remains impartial, technically credible, non-politicized
and based on rights and obligations of the parties under their safeguards agreements.
The development of new approaches to apply the IAEA safeguards should he
transparent. Political decisions on the IAEA safeguards, including amendments to
their implementation, should be adopted by the IAEA Policy-Making organs — the
General Conference and the Board of Governors, Development and implementation
of new approaches behind the scenes is unacceptable.
Mr. Chairman,
The establishment of a zone free of nuclear and all other weapons of mass
destruction (WMDFZ) in the Middle East remains among the central issues of the review
process. Despite the pause after the 2015 Review Conference, this objective is still on the
international agenda. It is evident that as 2020 approaches, the situation around the
4
WMDFZ will be more heated. It is in our common interests to achieve progress in this
area well in advance, preventing this issue from coming to the boiling point.
Convening a conference on the WMDFZ remains an urgent and achievable
objective in the context of implementing the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East.
Preparation for this event, including achieving the agreement on all organizational
modalities and substantive issues should be started as soon as possible. Russia as one of
the co-sponsors of the 1995 Resolution is willing to fuily support this process.
We would like to highlight the 50-year-exerience of the operation of the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (the
Treaty of Tlatelolco), which has rigorously proven its viability and effectiveness and
contributed significantly to the establishment around the world of NWFZs that today
unite over 100 countries. It is critical to finalize international legal status of the
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia through ratification of the Protocol to the
relevant Treaty by all nuclear weapon States. Russia has already done so.
Twenty years have passed since the opening of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) for signature. However, despite all the efforts, the Treaty
failed to enter into force.
We call upon the United States and other States key for the CTBT’s entry into
force to make every effort to urgently become Parties to the CTBT. It is in your hands
to finally make this crucial Treaty fully operational.
Mr. Chairman,
At NPT-related events, we often hear claims that nuclear disarmament is at a
stalemate and even does not exist anymore. This is totally wrong. In fact, over the last
thirty years an immense progress has been achieved in this area. Concerted actions of
Russia and the United States helped to overcome at least 80 % of the path towards a
nuclear weapon free world. This is proved by objective statistics that we have voiced
on numerous occasions at international fora. Such impressive results have required
efforts of thousands of experts and billions in expenditure. And it is impertinent to
ignore it for the sake of propaganda.
Despite the fact that international climate could be more favorable, Russia
continues to take specific measures to reduce its nuclear arsenals. The implementation
of the 2010 START Treaty goes as planned. We intend to reach the agreed levels by
February 5, 2018.
Many NPT Parties are tempted to reach complete nuclear disarmament
overnight. While understanding the motivation that pushed them to start negotiating
the prohibition of nuclear weapons, we believe they took the wrong path that
endangers the viability of the NPT regime. We know that the sponsors of the
negotiation process have different opinion and expect that a nuclear weapons ban
treaty would complement or even strengthen the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We cannot
accept this logic. We will explain our position during the current session of the
Preparatory Committee within the nuclear disarmament cluster.
Mr. Chairman,
Despite a whole range of NPT-related problems, there are still indisputable
achievements. First and foremost — the JCPOA. This instrument might be imperfect. It is
however a balanced and a very fragile compromise that needs to he treated in a very
delicate manner. Enough time has passed to declare with certainty that the deal is effective
and fulfills its mandate. Iran strictly abides by its commitments which is regularly
confirmed by the IAEA. All elements of the JCPOA have already become fully adjusted to
each other and enjoy growing trust of the international community. We encourage all, first
and foremost the participants of the JCPOA, to do their utmost to meet the aspirations of
the international community in terms of keeping for a long term this symbol of successful
diplomacy that has proven that NPT-based negotiations could solve any complex issue.
Mr. Chairman,
6
This review process will be complicated. We stand ready to support you and to
do our best to bring our difficult though necessary work to a success. We call upon all
the delegations to cooperate in a constructive and pragmatic way.
Thank you.