~OCTOXHHO~ IIpeACTaBIlTeJIbCTBO Permanent Mission
Pocc~Gc~toG Qe~epaq~~ of the Russian Federation
np~ OTA~~~HHI~ OOH H ApyrMx to the United Nations Office and
Me)KAyHaponHbIx OPT~HM~~~MRX B Other International Organizations
Xe~e~e in Geneva
UnofJicial translation
Check against delivery
STATEMENT
by Mikhail ULYANOV,
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
Director of the Department for Security Affairs and Disarmament
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 22 April 20 13 
Mr. Chairman,
Russia considers strengthening of the NPT and of the nuclear nonproliferation
regime as a whole as one the most important tasks and an absolute
foreign policy priority. Therefore, we attach particular importance to attaining the
highest possible effectiveness of the NPT review process.
We are convinced that consistent and balanced implementation and
strengthening of the Treaty objectively correspond to the interests of all countries.
We expect that during this review cycle through constructive cooperation between
all delegations we will be able to achieve such results that will be conducive to the
consolidation of international efforts aimed at intensive implementation of the NPT
potential with a view to preventing proliferation of nuclear weapons and ensuring
disarmament and peaceful nuclear cooperation.
We would like to draw the attention of all the delegations to the fourth P5
Conference chaired by the Russian Federation, which took place in Geneva at the
end of last week, just on the eve of this session of the Preparatory Committee. The
P5 countries reviewed the progress achieved in the implementation of the
commitments adopted at the 20 10 NPT Review Conference. Participants
conducted a detailed discussion of all the three pillars of the Treaty -nonproliferation,
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and disarmament. The Conference
resulted in the adoption of the Joint Statement of the P5 countries which will be
circulated today as a document of the Preparatory Committee.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me turn to the most urgent and acute issue of this NPT review cycle. We
need to put into practice the idea of creating a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other WMD as well as their means of delivery in the (WMDFZ). We
deplore that despite the existing decisions, the Conference on the establishment of
such a zone was never convened in 2012. 
We believe that the co-sponsors of the Conference did not have the authority
to postpone it. Russia never gave its consent to postponing the dates. No collective
decision concerning this matter had been taken by the co-sponsors. We would have
admitted the possibility of postponing the Conference, but only with the explicit
consent of all states of the Middle East and an announcement of new concrete
dates.
In the current situation we pursue active efforts with view of convening a
Conference on the Middle East WMDFZ at an early date. We insist on fixing the
date of the Conference without further delay. We believe that it could take place
before the end of this year.
As a first step we deem it important to hold a preparatory meeting to be
attended by all states of the Middle East. Its purpose would be to agree upon the
procedural modalities and the agenda of the Conference.
Generally, the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones (NWEZ) is an
important instrument in enhancing regional and international security as well as
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The geographical expansion of
such zones plays a major role in addressing the issue of providing legally binding
security assurances to non-nuclear weapon states.
In 201 1 Russia ratified Protocols I and I1 to the African Nuclear-WeaponFree
Zone Treaty. We support the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in
Central Asia and are ready to work both with our P5 partners and with the
countries of the region to finalize its legal status. This can and must be done before
the end of this year.
Russia has completed all internal procedures necessary to accede to the
Protocol to the Treaty of Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWEZ). We consider it ready to be signed by nuclear-weapon states.
Mr. Chairman,
The current international developments demonstrate that the task of
comprehensive strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime has never
I 
been more urgent. We strongly believe that today's challenges in the field of
nuclear non-proliferation can and should be handled within the framework of the
NPT and based upon the inviolability of its provisions, as well as in strict
compliance with norms of international law and with due respect to the legitimate
interests of all States in terms of security and development. It is essential to
promote the establishment of an architecture of international cooperation in
peaceful uses of nuclear energy which would reduce the risks of world-wide
proliferation of sensitive technologies with scrupulous respect for the rights of the
States that duly comply with their non-proliferation obligations to satisfy their
legitimate energy needs with the use of nuclear energy. And it is not only about
States fUlfilling their non-proliferation obligations, but also about nuclear materials
not falling into the hands of malicious non-State actors, primarily terrorists.
That is why Russia supports the promotion of the effectiveness of IAEA
safeguards, but only in such a way that these safeguards be applied in an absolutely
unbiased and objective manner. We expect the IAEA Director General to submit a
report on this issue to the upcoming IAEA General Conference. We fully support
the universalization of the Additional Protocol to the IAEA Safeguards Agreement
while recognizing that the accession to the Additional Protocol is absolutely
voluntary.
We support the work in the 1540 UNSC Committee and within the
framework of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). We
attach great importance to the universalization of international legal mechanisms in
the sphere of nuclear security and countering nuclear terrorism, namely the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment.
We call upon all parties concerned to accelerate the process of the ratification of
this Amendment.
Mr. Chairman, 
Russia has consistently supported the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy worldwide. That is, of course, on the basis of compliance with the NPT
commitments on the non-diversion of nuclear materials to military purposes. We
believe that this could be made possible inter alia through the establishment of a
modern and proliferation-resistant architecture of international cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy based on multilateral approaches to the nuclear
fuel cycle.
The Fulushima-Daiichi nuclear accident demonstrated the necessity to
strengthen international legal framework in order to ensure the safety of nuclear
facilities at stages of their construction and operation. To this end the Russian
Federation has put forward a number of initiatives on the improvement of relevant
international legal norms. We are convinced that early adoption of our proposals
will help to avoid or minimize the negative consequences of nuclear accidents in
the future.
We are pleased to note certain signs showing that nuclear renaissance has
recommenced after the Fukushima-Daiichi nuclear accident. Further study of the
lessons learned after the accident should be pursued in an emotionless manner thus
opening the way to a wide international discussion on the future of peaceful
nuclear energy.
In this context we count upon the High-level Conference "Nuclear Energy in
the 21S' century", which is to be held this June in Saint-Petersburg under the
auspices of the IAEA, to become one of the key international events of 20 13 and to
give a new impetus to the development of the global safety of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
In 2012, Russia and the USA continued their active work on the
implementation of the US-Russia Treaty on Measures for Further Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. It is the principle of equal and
undiminished security for all that the new Treaty is founded on. All its provisions 
are based strictly on the principle parity. We believe that this is the approach which
must invariably underpin international agreements as to the reduction and
limitation of arms.
In our view, it is important to work towards creating the conditions for
hrther steps in nuclear disarmament in accordance with Article VI of the NPT,
with all States possessing nuclear weapons joining this process. It is worth
mentioning that Article VI of the Treaty implies that not only nuclear-weapons
States, but all other States join the process leading to universal and complete
disarmament. Somehow that fact is often overloolted and the discussion focuses
exclusively on nuclear disarmament. Such interpretation of Article VI does not
reflect its real meaning.
The NPT Review Conference is the very forum for sending a strong political
message to the international community proving the unity of all State-parties to the
NPT in their support for the Treaty and their readiness to strictly adhere to their
obligations under the Treaty.
While consistently implementing the provisions of the NPT, Russia seeks to
substantially contribute to the achievement of the noble goals envisaged in the
Treaty. We encourage all States to pursue constructive cooperation, including at
the current session of the Committee, for the sake of our common and safe future.
Thank you for your attention. 