Samoa is a founding member of the Pacific Islands Forum. It is happy to associate itself with the statement delivered by Australia's Foreign Minister articulating our group's position on the on-going challenges facing the NPT, recent developments - both positive and worrisome - in the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. Our enduring hope of a world free of nuclear weapons and our legitimate expectations that 2010 will succeed where previous review conferences had failed to deliver.
Mr. President,
It is a fact that the Pacific was the scene of the only hostile usage of nuclear weaponry and of much nuclear explosions for testing purposes. Such nuclear testing has had significant and long term effects on the health of Pacific people and the environment. More permanently, the scars of fear and perhaps mistrust as a consequence of real life experiences of our people, during and after these tragic times, have given us a shared point of reference that has shaped our perspectives when discussing nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation issues.
Mr. President,
Nuclear weapons by their very existence, for whatever principal reason or fundamental justification, pose "needless" and "unintended" threats especially to non-nuclear weapon island states like mine.
True, the NPT probably has some deterrent and restraint capability, but giving it unqualified credit for the absence of nuclear confrontations in the recent past, while it's a consoling and a reassuring thought, does not, unfortunately, gives one a complete sense of comfort and safety. It is investing too much faith and trust in man as if he was infallible and therefore immortal.
Reassuringly, the fickleness and unpredictability of human nature has led many states parties during the present and previous reviews of the NPT to make the informed determination that a world without nuclear weapons is far safer, more secure and a prosperous place to live in.
Samoa is not a member of any military grouping and has no aspirations to do so. It has no military forces and its civilian police force is unarmed. Samoa is a friend to all UN member states and an enemy to none. It embraces with the large majority of UN member states the goal of a nuclear-weapons-free world embedded in Article 6 of the NPT. Like other member states, it believes that the only absolute guarantee against the use and the threat of use of nuclear weapons is through the total elimination of all nuclear weapons.
Moreover, the NPT pillars of nuclear disarmament, nuclear non- proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are mutually reinforcing and must be pursued and implemented with the necessary safeguards, vigor and importance they deserve.
Mr. President,
This month's review conference is an important milestone in the forty (40) year life of the NPT which continues to be an indispensable foundation of our global security regime. The review conferences affords small island states like Samoa an opportunity to contribute to the mosaic of views and suggestions before member states on how to make the NPT more effective and responsive to the needs of the global community to live in peace and security. It gives us a platform to advocate more forcibly with like-minded states on our support for the complete abolition of nuclear weapons.
Samoa has continually called for effective disarmament and the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Such weapons represent the greatest paradox of our time: while nations desire peace, and talk of peace, a disproportionate amount of the national wealth goes towards the development and acquisition or ever more sophisticated and destructive weapons of mass destruction. The nuclear weapons industry is more entrenched in the national nuclear weapons laboratories now than ever and more is spent today on nuclear weapons than ever before, even at the height of the Cold War.
Mr. President,Nuclear weapons, in particular, reach beyond this paradox, to impose a global curse. Their continuing existence casts a shadow of danger and fear, posing one of the greatest threats to international security and to global human survival. This remains a vital issue of today, not yesterday.
To underscore our commitment to the NPT goals, Samoa is a party to a number of international agreements that have as their primary objective the abolition and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Samoa has a large stake in safeguarding its environment and in the survival of the planet.
Mr. President,
The world doesn't have the luxury of time when it comes to eliminating the dangers posed by nuclear weapons. All states parties must work collaboratively in an environment of trust and confidence to ensure that the global risks from nuclear weapons are minimized if not eliminated altogether. We all live in one global family and only through global action of give and take could we succeed in our quest for a world free of nuclear weapons.
In closing, Samoa wants to commend the landmark developments in recent months which augur well for a successful 2010 review conference. The historical agreement between the United States and Russia on a new Strategic Reductions Agreement, the US Nuclear Posture Review plus United States Secretary of State Hilary Clinton's announcement that her government is moving towards the ratification of the Rarotonga Nuclear Free Zone Treaty which my own country is a party to and the Pelindaba Treaty are commendable actions that speak louder than words.
Let's re-commit ourselves individually and collectively to the noble objectives of the NPT so that we can leave behind a legacy that generations after us can be proud to inherit.
Thank you.










Mr. President,

Mr. President,

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 454

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



