Please check against delivery
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR TAN YEE WOAN,
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF SINGAPORE TO THE
UNITED NATIONS AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS IN GENEVA, AT THE SECOND SESSION OF
THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 NPT
REVIEW CONFERENCE, GENEVA, 22 APRIL - 3 MAY 2013
Mr Chairman,
1 Congratulations on your election as Chairman of the 2"d session of
the PrepCom for the 201 5 NPT Review Conference.
2 The NPT regime today is under serious strain. Countries outside
the NPT frameworlc that are laown to possess nuclear weapons continue
to resist becoming party to the Treaty. A former NPT State Party
withdrew from the Treaty, ceased cooperation with the IAEA and
continues to maintain its nuclear weapons capability. There are also
concerns that certain States Parties might be in violation of the Treaty
either through the alleged acquisition of nuclear weapons technology or
the transfer of material or lcnow-how to non-NPT States Parties.
Nevertheless, thc NPT remains the only near universal non-proliferation
regime. This second session of the PrepCom is an opportunity for States
Parties to collectively consider how to address these issues. In addition,
this meeting represents the mid-way point in our preparations for the
ninth Review Conference in 2015. We should explore possible areas of
coininon ground and how to build upon them, so as to maximise
prospects for a substantive and successful outcome in 201 5.
3 Singaporc supports the objectives of the NPT and its three
fundamental pillars of nuclear disarmament, nuclear nonproliferation,
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. All three pillars
are equally important and mutually reinforcing. The NPT is based on a
delicate balance of iilterests and its contiilued relevance will depend on
the delivery ofall its objectives.
4 On nuclear disarmament, a lot more needs to be done if nuclearweapon
states are to reassure non-nuclear-weapon states 01 their 
commitments under Article VI of the Treaty. We regret the continued
inability of the Conference of Disarmament to adopt a programme of
work and the impasse over the commencement of negotiations on a
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT).
5 ' The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) remains an essential
tool for the promotion of both nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Its entry into force is long overdue. Singapore welcomes Brunci
Darussalam's and Chad's ratification of the CTBT since the Prepcoin
met in Vienna last year. We urge all countries, in particular those in
Annex 2, to sign and ratify the CTBT.
6 We support the establishment of nuclear-weapon-Iree-zones as
part of regional efforts towards the end objective of a world free oI
nuclear weapons. Singapore is party to the Southeast Asia NuclearWeapon-Free-Zone
Treaty (SEANWFZ), which entered into force in
1997. We encourage the Nuclear Weapon States to sign the Protocol to
the SEANWFZ without reservations. We regret that the Conference on
the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction was not held in 2012 as mandated by
the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We hope that all relevant parties will
work constructively together to create a situation conducive to the
convening of the Conference.
7 Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are two sides of the
same coin. Transparency and accountability help to promote trust and
confidence. In this regard, given that non-nuclear-weapon States Parties
to the NPT have undertalcen to accept the safeguards of the IAEA, we call
on States Parties which have yet to conclude an IAEA Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement to do so without delay. In addition, we encourage
all non-nuclear-weapon States Parties that have not done so to conclude
an Additional Protocol to further promote trust and confidence within the
international community that all nuclear material and activities in the
territory concerned, whether declared or undeclared, are intended only for
peaceful uses. We urge all States to abide by their international
obligations, including those under the relevant LJNSC and IAEA Board
resolutions. In this regard, we urge the DPRK to desist from firther
provocative actions, to fully comply with the relevant UNSC and IAEA
resolutions, and return to the NPT. We also call on Iran to take the
necessary steps to address international concerns about its nuclear 
programme, and to fully comply with its international obligations under
the relevant UNSC and IAEA resolutions.
8 To strengthen the non-proliferation regime, it is important that all
countries do their part to act against the illicit trafficking of materials and
technology for sanctioned end-uses. A total supply chain approach is
crucial to ensure that the system is robust and at the same time, does not
hamper legitimate trade. Singapore was the first country in our region to
establish an export controls regime. We have participated actively in
regional and international forums to share our experiences as well as to
learn from others. We also endeavour to work. closely with the
international community through such initiatives as the Proliferation
Security Initiative (PSI) in order to advance our common goal.
9 We strongly support the right of all countries under Article IV of
the NPT to peaceful uses of nuclear energy (PUNE) and technology.
The benefits of nuclear technology extend beyond that of nuclear power,
to important areas such as food and agriculture, water resources, and
human health.
10 The lack of viable alternative energy sources faced by many
countries and climate change concerns malce it difficult for some
countries to comnpletely give up the option of nuclear energy. However,
this right carries with it responsibilities and obligations. It is imperative
that all countries abide by their international obligations and provide the
necessary assurances in order to build international confidence in the
peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes. In addition, all players
within the industry, from vendor countries developing reactor technology
to the operators and the regulators, must maintain the highest standards of
safety and security. The accident at the Fukushiina Dai-ichi facility
demonstrated that we can never be complacent about nuclear safety and
security. In particular, a strong safety and security culture is essential to
lay a concrete foundation for the sustainable, sde and secure use 'of
nuclear power. Singapore stands ready to worlc with the international
con~munity in this regard. Within ASEAN, the proposal by Thailand for
an ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy
(ASEANTOM) to promote cooperation in this area was endorsed at the
20" ASEAN Summit in April 2012 and its Terms of Reference were
recently finalised. 
To conclude Mr Chairman,
11 Singapore hopes that States Parties will use the current review
cycle to examine how we can promote the effectiveness of the NPT. For
it to remain relevant, the Treaty cannot remain static in the face of new
challenges. As long as nuclear weapons continue to remain a ltey part of
national security policies, the danger of a nuclear war exists: Singapore
remains firmly committed to the NPT, and stands ready to work with all
States Parties to maintain this vital instrument as a cornerstone of the
global security architecture. 