Allow me to begin by congratulating you on the assumption of this highly demanding post of the President of the NPT Review Conference. I am confident that with your broad experience and demonstrated diplomatic skills, you will guide us through our work in a most efficient and productive manner, I wish to assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation as you discharge your important responsibilities.
Mr. President, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Statement delivered by the High Representative Ashton on behalf of the European Union has embodied the main elements that we consider to be of outmost importance. Slovakia fully supports and aligns herself with this statement. Nevertheless, I would like to make additional comments on issues that are of a particular interest to my delegation.
Mr. President,
There is no doubt that proliferation of weapons of mass destruction continues to be one of the major threats to international peace and security. There is no single country that can face it alone. We must address it together and we must address it in an effective and responsible way.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains a unique and irreplaceable framework for maintaining and strengthening international peace, security and stability. Its three mutually reinforcing pillars - non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - represent a system of communicating vessels whose balance must be preserved. We meet at a moment when challenges and opportunities provide a crucial momentum and stimulus for maintaining and strengthening the authority and integrity of the Treaty.
We are convinced that it can only be done through a balanced approach to ail three pillars of the Treaty. We must be given guarantees that there is no misuse of nuclear energy as much as we need guarantees that there is a real progress 011 nuclear disarmament in a way towards total elimination of nuclear weapons. Such an environment can provide further incentives for peaceful use of nuclear energy we all need to satisfy glowing energy demands, improve health care and for much more.
Mr. President,
My country is fully committed to creating a safer world for all of us. Disarmament, and in particular nuclear disarmament, is an important tool that can get us closer to this goal. Slovakia traditionally places the principle of multilateralism in the center of the international community's endeavor for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Nevertheless, we appreciate any initiatives, including unilateral and bilateral ones, which result in further reduction of existing nuclear arsenals.In this context, Slovakia welcomes the successful conclusion of negotiations and signature of a new agreement between the United States and the Russian Federation on the reduction of nuclear weapons. We believe that it provides new impetus and incentives to non-proliferation agenda, particularly in the context of the NPT review process.
At the same time, Mr, President, we are concerned that the international community continues to face challenges in the framework of the NPT, which threaten our global security. Non-compliance with non-proliferation obligations ranks certainly among the most severe. We cannot tolerate it. The international community must be ready and show its determination to address them in a way, which would restore its confidence in peaceful nuclear activities, Ability to act together in a concerted manner is an important moment for deterring possible violations of generally accepted norms.
We have multilateral instruments at our disposal, which must be preserved and reinforced in order to provide such a confidence. Safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is designed to verify the absence of activities not consistent with the NPT. Slovakia is convinced that the Additional Protocol should be an integral part of this system. It is an essential tool for efficient and effective performance of the IAEA verification activities. We call on all State Parties that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Additional Protocol.
Mr. President
We note that a growing number of states show interest in developing civil nuclear programmes that should help them in addressing their energy needs.
Slovakia holds the firm view that the Article IV of the NPT, which provides each of its State-Parties with the inalienable right for peaceful uses of nuclear energy, is a vital part of the comprehensive bargain stroke under the Treaty. But the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can never be truly realized if they are not simultaneously accompanied by living up fully to all other parts of the NPT.
By the same token, we stress the importance of the understanding that the compliance obligations and verification mandates stipulated in the NPT do not stand in the way of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. They are designed to rather facilitate responsible development of nuclear energy and to provide for mutual trust in their exclusively peaceful application. One cannot but emphasize the central role of the IAEA and its technical cooperation programme.
Nuclear energy is essential for meeting overall energy needs in Slovakia. Nuclear power plants cover for a substantial percentage of my country's electricity production. According to our national energy strategy, nuclear energy will remain an important source of energy in the long term. This will continue to be realized hand in hand with keeping with the highest safety and security standards.
Mr. President
Our expectations for this NPT Review Conference cannot be less than ambitious. This applies not only to looking back at five years passed and the challenges and opportunities brought about, but especially and foremost to the actions that we are going to conceive here for the future. Such actions should lead us to a renewed and strengthened NPT regime and its review process, We see this happen through working further towards the universality of the NPT and reinforcing its comprehensive implementation.
Let me assure you once again, Mr. President, of my delegation's unwavering commitment to our shared goal of making this Review Conference a successful one. We stand ready to engage most constructively with you and all State-Parties to the NPT towards achieving this objective.
Thank you for your attention.









Mr. President,

Mr. President,







Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



