Mr Chairman, Excellencies,
Allow me first to congratulate you, Ambassador Cabactulan, on your election and the work you have done thus far, including informal consultations, to bring the different views of the States Parties closer together. My delegation has full confidence in your judgment and we are convinced that you will wisely continue to guide this conference and bring us to successful and tangible conclusions and a substantial and balanced final document that will give us direction in nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament, and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr Chairman,
To what Baroness Ashton has already presented on behalf of the EU, I would like to add that Slovenia, as a Party to the NPT as well as other non-proliferation and disarmament mechanisms and regimes, respects and is actively contributing to the implementation of the obligations arising from them. We are convinced that today, as we celebrate the 40th anniversary of its entry in to force, the NPT is the cornerstone of international peace, security and stability. We must do our utmost to preserve the integrity of the Treaty and to strengthen its role in the future. Consequently, our common goal should be universal acceptance and implementation of all objectives enshrined in the NPT.
We welcome the latest positive developments in the area of nuclear disarmament, especially (1) the signing of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), where we look forward to swift ratification; (2) the new US Nuclear Posture Review, which limits the role of nuclear weapons in national doctrines and sets ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a priority; and (3) the successful outcome of the Nuclear Security Summit with shared understanding of the risk of possession of nuclear materials by terrorists and the decision taken to secure all vulnerable nuclear material within four years. We are convinced that these developments, including addressing non-strategic weapons, pave the way forward and will encourage others, including non-States Parties to the NPT, to take further concrete steps in the field of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
Besides a strong call to NPT States Parties to ratify the CTBT and thus enable its entry into force, my Government is also very keen on starting negotiations for a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) in the Conference on Disarmament. An FMCT, which should also contain an effective verification mechanism, where the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) could play an important role, would significantly contribute to nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament, and would also complement the NPT and the CTBT.
In the last two decades the global non-proliferation landscape has faced many challenges and negative developments that also limit the credibility of the NPT:
Unilateral withdrawal from the NPT. It is most surely the sovereign right of any state to withdraw from the NPT, but we must be sure that the country concerned is in compliance with all its IAEA safeguards obligations and that the IAEA can verify the absence of undeclared activities to prevent a threat to the entire world.
Some nations violate their international obligations and thus represent proliferation risks to the international community. Being in breach of safeguards obligations and not complying with the demands of the relevant international bodies (i.e. IAEA Board of Governors, UNSC) gives rise to concerns about the possible military dimensions of their nuclear programmes.
(3) After 40 years of existence of the NPT, its universality is still unfinished business, which brings us back to my call for universal adherence to the Treaty.
Let me continue with the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In this global world, international cooperation based on responsible development of nuclear energy is of the utmost importance. It is one of the most important strategic resources and an engine of development. Therefore, it is not surprising that many countries have expressed interest in nuclear energy becoming part of their energy policy. This revival or expansion of nuclear energy will surely bring greater prosperity to different parts of the world, but it may also increase the proliferation risks. New states will be attaining nuclear technology and know-how. Therefore appropriate control measures must be in place to prevent the misuse of this sensitive technology.
Slovenia welcomes and supports the priorities and initiatives taken by the Director General of the IAEA in the area of medical applications, particularly in relation to cancer diagnosis and treatment in developing countries, where Slovenia is assisting its partners in the Western Balkans. The use of nuclear technologies in health, food production, agriculture and hydrology offers great hope for humanity and sustainable development.
My Government fully supports an effective IAEA, which has served as a global focal point for nuclear cooperation for more than 50 years, with concrete projects and mechanisms in the area of international cooperation for the peaceful use of nuclear energy, nuclear safety and security, and for strengthening the safeguards to prevent nuclear proliferation. On the point of nuclear safety and security let me just add that Slovenia has ratified the amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and calls upon all other States Parties to the NPT to do the same.
Mr Chairman, Excellencies,
In conclusion, Slovenia will continue contributing to our common goal and vision of a world free of nuclear weapons. Through international cooperation and understanding, and in an environment of mutual trust, we can achieve it. This is our collective responsibility.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



