Statement by Amb. Karol Mistrík
Director, Department for Disarmament and Counter-Terrorism
Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General debate
Vienna, 2 May 2017
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to congratulate you on the assumption of the chairmanship of the first
session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference.
Slovakia wishes you all the success in your endeavours in steering this body. My
delegation is looking forward to your leadership and I would like to assure you of
Slovakia’s support.
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement, which was delivered on behalf
of the European Union. Nevertheless, I would like to make the following remarks
in my national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
We have gathered here to find a way forward and to get the NPT review process
back on track. It is our shared responsibility that NPT regime will be strengthened
and not weakened.
We believe that we need to reaffirm the centrality of the NPT as the cornerstone of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and disarmament. It represents a
unique and irreplaceable framework for maintaining and strengthening
international peace and security.
Slovakia considers all three NPT pillars equally important and mutually
reinforcing. We call on all State Parties to implement all the obligations and
commitments assumed under the NPT or undertaken during previous Review 
Conferences. We need to promote universalisation of the NPT. We call upon
States, which have not yet done so, to join the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon
States.
Nuclear disarmament is a fundamental pillar of the Treaty. We all share a common
vision of a world without nuclear weapons. The only way to achieve complete
elimination of nuclear weapons is through effective, verifiable and irreversible
nuclear disarmament. Slovakia supports the progressive “building blocks”
approach.
We believe that we should work towards a set of mutually reinforcing and legally
binding instruments and the prevailing international security environment must be
taken into account. Only by addressing both, the security and humanitarian
dimensions of nuclear weapons, we can take the incremental but necessary steps
that will enhance security for all and provide the best chance of reaching a world
without nuclear weapons.
We need to generate a momentum to continue the forward course in disarmament
and implement the consensus 2010 NPT Action Plan and the 13 practical steps to
disarmament agreed at 2000 NPT Review conference.
The revitalization of the Conference on Disarmament and its negotiating role is of
vital importance to treaty-based nuclear disarmament and arms control. It is
necessary to overcome the longstanding deadlock of the Conference and Slovakia,
during its forthcoming Presidency in the Conference, will contribute to this effort.
Slovakia continues to support immediate commencement of negotiations on a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices (FMCT). We share the views that such a treaty would
offer a unique opportunity to create a non-discriminatory regime with equal
obligations nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states. In this regard, we welcome the
establishment of the FMCT High Level Expert Preparatory Group based on UN
General Assembly resolution 71/259.
Slovakia supports further development of the multilateral nuclear verification
capabilities necessary for the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons. In this regard we welcome the adoption of UN 2016 General
Assembly resolution on Nuclear Disarmament Verification.
Slovakia recognizes the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a
crucial element of the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. We call on
all States that have not ratified the CTBT, especially the remaining Annex II
countries, which bear special responsibility for the entry into force of the Treaty, to
do so without delay. Slovakia has actively been contributing to the building of the 
CTBTO capacities, including its verification regime. We believe that the
Agreement between Slovakia and the CTBTO Preparatory Commission on mutual
cooperation related to On-Site Inspections, which was ratified last year, will
provide additional driving force in support of the Treaty. We stand ready to deepen
our existing cooperation with the CTBTO Preparatory Commission.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons still remains the challenge for the
international community and is a threat to international peace and security.
Since the last Review Conference, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea the
has carried out nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches. They are flagrant
violations of multiple UN Security Council resolutions. We categorically reject and
condemn such irresponsible and provocative acts as they constitute a serious threat
to regional stability and international peace and security. We call upon North
Korea to abandon its nuclear weapon and missile programs in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) demonstrates the possibility of
peaceful and diplomatic solutions to the proliferation challenges. Slovakia
welcomes progress made so far in its implementation, and underlines the need to
continue ensuring full and effective implementation throughout the entire lifetime
of the deal. The early ratification by Iran of the Additional Protocol is also
essential.
We reaffirm our full support for the establishment of a zone free of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East. We regret that it
has not been possible so far to convene a Conference on the establishment of such
a zone. We think, the building of trust and confidence among all stakeholders is the
only sustainable way to agree arrangements for a meaningful conference, to be
attended by all States of the Middle East on the basis of arrangements freely
arrived at by them.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system has the pivotal
role in the implementation of the NPT non-proliferation obligations. Slovakia
provides full and continuous support to the IAEA in order to ensure that the
Agency is able to meet its safeguards responsibilities. We stress the obligation of
states to cooperate with the IAEA in order to facilitate the implementation of
safeguards agreements. We share the view that the IAEA full-scope safeguards and
the Additional Protocol constitute the current verification standard. We call on all
State Parties that have not yet done so to sign and ratify both the Comprehensive 
Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol.
Mr. Chairman,
Slovakia fully supports peaceful use of nuclear energy. The NPT provides a solid
framework for promoting confidence and cooperation in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. Slovakia supports both the IAEA, and IAEA Member States in
fulfilling this endeavour.
We underscore that, in accordance with Article IV of the NPT, each country is free
to decide whether or not to include nuclear power as part of its own energy mix.
Nuclear power remains an important option for achieving energy security and
reaching sustainable development goals for many countries requiring a stable and
safe source of energy.
Nuclear safety is one of the key preconditions for the use of nuclear energy.
Supporting the safety-related activities by establishing safety standards and making
its expert services available to the Member States, is an indispensable role of the
Agency. Slovakia supports the Agency´s efforts in assisting the Member States in
the application of Safety Standards, and promoting adherence to the relevant
international conventions.
All EU nuclear power plants, including in Slovakia, carried out risk and safety
assessments (so called stress tests) in order to re-assess their overall safety and
robustness against extreme natural events. The results confirmed that EU Member
States were complying with high standards of nuclear safety.
We also fully appreciate the Agency's role in promoting responsible development
of peaceful applications of nuclear technology in all areas, for example in human
health, food and agriculture, nuclear and radiation safety, and nuclear energy.
The development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes must be realized hand in
hand with the high security standards as well. Slovakia is concerned by the risk
that terrorists may acquire, traffic or use nuclear or other radioactive materials.
While recognising that nuclear security remains the responsibility of States,
international cooperation contributes to strengthening nuclear security. Slovakia
considers the entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material as an essential step in the right direction. Nuclear
facilities and nuclear materials in Slovakia are subject to stringent security
regulations. We have also made significant effort to protect the nuclear facilities
against terrorism and sabotage. Among others, these measures include training
programs for security staff, robust physical protection and intruder surveillance and
detection systems. 
Mr. Chairman,
To conclude, let me express hope that this Preparatory Committee which marks the
beginning of the new review cycle will succeed in strengthening the NPT regime.
Slovakia is committed to this aim and stands ready to cooperate with other
delegations in achieving it.
Thank you for your attention.