Mr. President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Please allow me at the outset, on behalf of the Republic of Slovenia, to congratulate you and other members of the bureau on the appointment to the posts of the 2005 Review Conference of the State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I wish you every success. I would like to assure you of our full support in your efforts throughout the next four weeks and that you can always count on assistance of my delegation as one of the vice-presidents of the Conference.
Slovenia fully concurs with the statement made by Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union. Our views are also contained in the Common Position of the Council of the European Union, adopted in Brussels on 25 April this year. In addition to that let me touch upon few points which are particularly important for my delegation.
A 2005 NPT Review Conference is held in a year of high expectations, related to the September High Level Meeting of Head of States and Governments. We should take an advantage of this momentum to adopt bold decisions particularly taking into account recommendations put forward in the Report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations "In larger Freedom: Towards Development, Security and Human Rights of All". We support the Report and believe that proposals contained therein should serve as well as one of the basis for our discussions during die Conference.
Mr. President,
Slovenia considers the risk of use of weapons of mass destruction as one of the most dangerous threats to peace and stability at the global as well as the regional level. We firmly believe that NPT remains a cornerstone and a vital instrument in the preservation of peace, security and international stability. Its universality is crucial for preservation of the integrity of the Treaty and reinforcement of its implementation. In this regard we would like to congratulate countries that became Parties to the Treaty since last Review Conference in 2000. At the same time we call on the remaining States that still haven't signed and ratified the Treaty to do so as a non-nuclear-weapon States at an early stage,
Mr. President,
My delegation is of the strong opinion that a balance between the three major pillars of the Treaty - non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and peaceful use of nuclear energy - should be preserved.
Since the 2000 NPT Conference we have been witnesses to the grave violations of the non- proliferation regime. Of a particular concern is the risk of access by terrorists to the weapons of mass destruction. We fully agree with the view of the UN Security Council that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to peace and security. In this regard we welcome adoption of the Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004), which has filled a gap in existing multilateral non-proliferation and control regimes, and we wish to stress the importance of its implementation. We call on all States that have yet not done so to submit their national reports as soon as possible. Slovenia stands ready to provide assistance, as appropriate, to those countries lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation experience or sources for fulfilling the provisions from that resolution.
As a country that possesses nuclear facilities and thoroughly fulfills its international non- proliferation obligations Slovenia attaches great importance to the inalienable right of the Parties to the NPT to develop research, produce and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance with Article IV of the Treaty. However we believe that all activities should be transparent and under the scrutiny of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). In this regard we see the role of the Agency as invaluable. Specific role is played by the Additional Protocols to the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreements with the IAEA. Unfortunately the Additional Protocol entered into the force in only 65 States Parties of the NPT. Our main task in the near future should be universalization of the Additional Protocols thus strengthening the non-proliferation regime set up by the Treaty. In our view the IAEA should continue to assist States in preparing so called model legislation. The fact that so many State Parties lack their domestic legislation is a real threat to the present system of nuclear nonproliferation regime of the Treaty. Slovenia has ratified Additional Protocol to the Safeguard Agreement with IAEA in 2000.
Slovenia welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General of the United Nations contained in the Report "In larger Freedom: Towards Development, Security and Human Rights of All" concerning greater role of the IAEA in the field of nuclear non-proliferation. One of the interesting ideas put forward in the Report is that IAEA should become a guarantor for the supply of fissile material to civilian nuclear users and we are ready to discuss this proposal during the Conference.
Slovenia considers Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a vital part of disarmament and non-proliferation regime and calls on all states that have yet not done so, particularly states listed in Annex II of CTBT, to sign and ratify the Treaty without delay. We have to bear in mind that further delay of the entering into force of the Treaty may have global consequences - not only in the form of a permanent nuclear threat to the human race but it could also undermine global and regional achievements and systematic approaches in the field of arms control and nonproliferation. The universal character of the Treaty's provisions provides security for all and should leave no place for excuses based on national security needs and regional political-security environments.
On a national level Slovenia introduced in the year 2000 new and stricter legislation in the field of dual use items export control. This legislation has been further amended last year. As a member of the European Union Slovenia has applied the European Union Council Regulation 1343/04 on the export control of dual use items. We also started our cooperation with EURATOM, thus reinforcing international control over our nuclear reactors and capabilities. By membership in the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and Zangger Committee, Slovenia has reconfirmed its policy of nuclear nonproliferation.
Mr.President,
Slovenia attaches a great importance to the systematic and progressive efforts towards nuclear disarmament and fully implements its share of responsibilities in accordance with Article VI of NPT. Slovenia also considers 13 practical steps, contained in the Final Document of 2000 NPT Review Conference, still valid and in place,-We^ recognize important steps made- by nuclear weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals, particularly ratification of the Moscow Treaty in 2002. At the same time we call on all nuclear weapon States to continue with efforts to meet their Article VI obligations.
Mr. President,
Slovenia strongly supports the EU position concerning the withdrawal from the NPT, which will be presented during the discussion in Main Committees. We believe that the Conference should adopt appropriate measures that will discourage State Parties to withdraw from the Treaty. We would like to stress the need to strengthen the role of the Security Council as a final arbiter when obligations under the Treaty are violated. Slovenia expects that Conference will achieve some tangible results in this regard.
Mr. President,
Let me finish with expressing our satisfaction with the conclusion of negotiations and adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of acts of Nuclear Terrorism by the UN General Assembly last month. My government considers the adoption of this Convention as a major impetus for a more ambitious and successful work of the NPT Review Conference. In this context it is my pleasure to announce that Slovenia intends to sign the Convention at the time of its opening in September this year. We call on all States to act likewise.
Thank you Mr. President.
