Statement by
H.E. Mr. Miroslav LAJČÁK
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and European Affairs of
the Slovak Republic
Head of Delegation
The 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 27 April 2015
- Check against delivery -
Madam President,
Let me start by expressing, on behalf of the Slovak Government and myself, our sincere
condolences to the people of Nepal and to all those affected by the disastrous earthquake that
hit the country.

I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of this Review
Conference. I wish you all the success in your endeavor in steering the negotiations in the
coming weeks. I also assure you of Slovakia’s full support in fulfilling your responsible and
challenging tasks.
We have heard about the decision of the UN High Representative for Disarmament Affairs to
conclude her mission on this post soon after the current NPT Review Conference.
Nevertheless, we continue to rely on you to help steer us also through this crucial event which
will significantly affect further developments in global security.
Madam President,
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement which will be delivered on behalf of the
European Union in the course of our discussion. Nevertheless, I would like to stress few
comments in my national capacity.
We have gathered here to put the Treaty, which represents a key element of global security,
into scrutiny. The Non-Proliferation Treaty remains a unique and irreplaceable framework for
maintaining and strengthening international peace, security, and stability. We must therefore
arm ourselves with high ambitions and expectations. Yet, at the same time, we must remain
realistic and pragmatic.
We face serious deterioration of security situation around the world which is a matter of a
serious concern. We need to generate a momentum to protect the Treaty and to maintain our
forward course that we have put in place by the 2010 Action Plan.
We see growing differences among NPT Member States on some areas and issues. It will be a
challenge, but at the same time absolute necessary, to establish a common ground across the
NPT. We need to keep a balanced approach to the Treaty in its all three pillars.
We need to work together and focus on finding a consensus in order to take our multilateral
efforts forward. However, the efforts to reach a consensus should not lead to ignoring or
omitting issues relevant in the NPT context. Such an approach would jeopardize the basic aim
of the Conference.
Madam President,
Nuclear disarmament is a key pillar of the Treaty. Advancing on the full implementation of all
commitments and undertakings in this area is a vital element and the main tool towards
strengthening the Treaty and the non-proliferation regime as a whole.
A vision of a world without nuclear weapons remains a driving force in this regard.
Elimination of nuclear arsenals is an integral part of a nuclear-weapon-free world and one of
the building blocks that are essential for its creation.
There is no doubt that the elimination goes hand in hand with the reduction. The reductionassociated
efforts must indeed be driven by a genuine intention of eliminating nuclear
weapons with an aim to materialize the vision.
We believe that the right way forward is to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in security
strategies and defense doctrines. This would pave the way towards reductions of nuclear
arsenals.
Slovakia believes that in advancing nuclear disarmament we should work towards a set of
mutually reinforcing and legally binding instruments underpinning a commitment for the total
elimination of nuclear weapons.
The humanitarian dimension related to the nuclear weapons has recently regained an
increased attention among the states. It ranks among issues with a wide scale of perceptions
and understandings of possibilities and opportunities to address it.
The Vienna Conference in December last year was an important event in this regard and has
added to a series of events aimed at awareness raising on the horrific consequences of nuclear
weapons explosions. We have taken a careful note of a broad range of views and ideas
expressed and introduced there.
Slovakia participated in all three international conferences on humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons and always clearly expressed its views.
As we all need to strive for the prevention in use of nuclear weapons, whether deliberate or
accidental, Slovakia continues to support the process that would lead to the total elimination
of nuclear arsenals, including the reasons for their existence. It would facilitate an effective
elimination of the threat of nuclear weapon detonation and contribute significantly to the
ultimate goal of creating and maintaining a world free of nuclear weapons.
Humanitarian dimension certainly underpins the NPT and adds to reasons why we need to
move the NPT process onward.
Madam President,
The non-proliferation regime faces serious non-proliferation challenges. Non-compliance with
the non-proliferation obligations ranks high among them. The proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continues to be one of the major threats to international peace and security.
Elimination of this threat requires a concerted effort which would sustain a global interest in
the nuclear energy and allow for enjoying fully its peaceful use. We need to focus further on a
preventive element, including the best utilization of instruments available to us.
Slovakia provides full and continuous support to the International Atomic Energy Agency in
order to ensure that the Agency is able to meet its safeguards responsibilities. Slovakia, which
currently chairs the Board of Governors, stresses the obligation of States to cooperate with the
IAEA in order to facilitate the implementation of safeguards agreements. 
We share the view that the IAEA full-scope safeguards and the Additional Protocol constitute
the current verification standard. We call on all State Parties that have not yet done so to sign
and ratify both the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol.
Slovakia also supports the IAEA in continuing the implementation of integrated safeguards
for those States where both a comprehensive safeguards agreement and additional protocol
are in force and where the IAEA Secretariat has drawn the broader conclusion that all nuclear
material remains in peaceful activities.
Slovakia also welcomes and fully supports the diplomatic efforts of E3+3 as well as Iran to
find a comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
We welcome the agreement on the Parameters for a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
Regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s Nuclear Program. We hope this agreement will be
turned into a final comprehensive solution at the end of June. It is important to seize the
opportunity and to bring this issue to the desired positive conclusion.
In this regard, Slovakia recognizes the crucial role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in the verification of Iran’s nuclear program and it commends the Agency for its work done so
far. IAEA reports provide a key benchmark for the evaluation of the obligations’ compliance.
Slovakia supports the outcomes of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, including the one on
the Middle East. We regret the postponement of convening a conference on WMD free zone
in the Middle East.
However, we should not let the 2015 NPT Review Conference sink owing to the fact that the
Conference must yet to take place. We should continue working and advance on the
implementation of the 2010 Action Plan. The current Review Conference should underpin
outcomes, including those on the Middle East, achieved so far.
My country continues to fully support the facilitator – Ambassador Jaakko Laajava of Finland
and his team – in their efforts to lay the groundwork for a successful conference with the
participation of all States in the region. We hope that it will be possible to convene the
Conference as soon as possible. Slovakia wishes to see a reinforcing perspective for it at this
Review Conference.
Madam President,
Extending a toolbox of non-proliferation and disarmament instruments available to the
international community is an important part of strengthening international security
architecture.
Stagnation in the strengthening and the moving forward of norms on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation endangers the global security environment and especially the disarmament
landscape. We risk changes in the landscape.
Facing enormous difficulty to trigger the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament, we
must think together about ways forward. Nonetheless, we should make sure that it strengthens
rather than weakens the global non-proliferation and disarmament regime. 
We understand that the Conference on Disarmament does not operate in a vacuum. It is
affected by the external environment, developments therein and interactions of its players.
One of the major aspects of the current deadlock with the Conference lies outside the ‘sick
body’.
That brings me to a dilemma whether we should try to put such a ‘body’ on a course of
‘outside treatment’ in order for it to be able to deal with issues inside the ‘body’ or we should
focus on outside treatment of inside issues?
Many are also exploring whether a ‘shock therapy’ would help.
I believe that we need to resuscitate the ‘body’ and to revive its potential to deliver on
pressing issues of the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda. However, we need to do it
swiftly in order to reaffirm the relevance of the Conference to address current security needs.
The revitalization of the Conference on Disarmament and its negotiation role is in vital
interest of the non-proliferation regime and the Non-Proliferation Treaty as its cornerstone.
Madam President,
Slovakia fully supports peaceful use of nuclear energy. The Article IV of the NPT, which is a
crucial part of the comprehensive bargain accomplished under the Treaty, has its leading role
in this regard.
However, trust and confidence are the key elements for the development of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, if we want to take full advantage of it. It must be realized hand in hand
with the highest safety and security standards as well as non-proliferation conditions.
Slovakia recognizes the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in promoting safe
and secure use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It can make a valuable contribution to
meet the social-economic needs and sustainable development all over the word.
Madam President, let me conclude by wishing the Conference constructive deliberations and a
positive outcome – in the interest of all of us. 