SLOVENIA
Check against delivery!
STATEMENT
by H.E. Mr. Andrej Logar, ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Slovenia to the United Nations
at the General debate of the
3RD MEETING OF PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR 2015 NPT REVIEW
CONFERENCE
(New York, 28 April–8 May 2014)
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first to congratulate you for your election as chair of the 3rd Meeting of the
Preparatory Committee of the 2015 NPT Review Conference that we started on Monday. I am
confident that you will guide us wisely throughout this meeting. Let me assure you that my
delegation will fully support your endeavors.
I would like to align my statement with the statement of the European Union (EU),
delivered by the European Union Special Envoy for Non-proliferation and Disarmament,
Ambassador Jacek Bylica. Allow me to highlight a few points that are of particular
importance to Slovenia.
Mr. Chairman, as a staunch supporter of the NPT, Slovenia continues to consider the NPT as
a cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and consequently a cornerstone
of international peace and security. Slovenia believes in a balanced consideration of all three
pillars of the NPT and continues to share a vision of a world free of nuclear weapons
presented by US President Barack Obama. We are convinced that the NPT should continue to
play a central role in our joint endeavors to turn this vision into reality. Next year we will
meet here at the 2015 NPT Review Conference to assess the implementation of the 2010
Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference and decide how the States Parties will
proceed in the next five years, i.e. until the 2020 Review Conference. In the course of next
two weeks, we should take relevant decisions in order to facilitate a smooth start of the 2015
Review Conference. To that end, we should adopt the agenda of the Review Conference and
identify and decide on the chairperson of the 2015 Review Conference already at this meeting
of the Preparatory Committee. We count on your wisdom, which will enable us to adopt these
two important decisions.
Mr. Chairman, at the 2010 Review Conference, we also decided to convene a conference on
the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of
mass destruction in 2012. Unfortunately this has not yet been realized. However, Slovenia
commends Ambassador Jaako Laajava of Finland for his tireless efforts to enable the
convening of this conference. We encourage him to continue his efforts and hope that the
conference will be convened before the Review Conference in May 2015. 
Mr. Chairman, there have been many new developments over the past several years. We are
concerned about the ongoing war in Syria and the crisis in Ukraine. We should not forget that
Ukraine gave up nuclear weapons in 1994 with the Budapest Memorandum. We sincerely
hope that the de-escalation of tensions in this country is still attainable without serious
implications for regional and international peace and security. This period has also brought
some more encouraging developments, such as the agreement on Iran's nuclear program
concluded in January this year. We hope for its implementation as well as for further steps
towards a comprehensive solution.
Mr. Chairman, this meeting of the Preparatory Committee will address many issues, and
Slovenia will provide its comments on some of them. I would like to particularly highlight
today's 10th anniversary of the adoption of resolution no. 1540. With this resolution we
adopted new international standards on how to deal with the prevention of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-state actors, mainly terrorists. This issue was overlooked
in the past, which is no longer the case. Slovenia is satisfied with the implementation of this
resolution. More than 170 states reported on their activities, which is a major success. We
commend the Security Council for extending the mandate of the 1540 Committee until 2021.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 