
Let me begin by congratulating you on your election, my delegation would like to assure you and your bureau of our support as we begin the noble task of reviewing the operations of the NPT provided for under Article VIII. We do so with a sense of commitment leaving behind past failures having another in building on current mechanism and having a go in creating a safer world for our people.
We live in a world where power is measured by the might of a country's nuclear arsenal and against the backdrop of changing global military postures, postures that is creating uncertainty within our international system. Postures that guarantees security for some and insecurity for others. Postures that are seeing an increase of militarization globally and threats of the use of similar or crude arsenals by non state actors is a growing reality.
Mr. President,
We must as a goal come away from this Assembly with practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to eliminate nuclear weapons via a legally binding international instrument and guarantee unconditional security assurance to non nuclear weapon states. We can only do so with genuine dialogue and cooperation.
Mr. President,
We certainly need to accelerate negotiations on a time bound Plan of Action to take concrete steps to eliminate nuclear weapons. We have no difficulty with the proposal of establishing a standing committee to review, monitor and verify disarmament undertaken unilaterally and bilaterally.
Secondly the full implementation of the nuclear free zones treaties by nuclear weapons states within the period 2010 -2015
Conclude negotiations on further reduction of nuclear arsenals to formally commence this year.
Increase confidence between states by transferring nuclear weapons in a secure storage under international supervision. Arrangements should include cover the second phase between 2015-2020
Third phase should include elimination of all nuclear weapons and application of safeguard on nuclear facilities on a universal basis.
Mr. President,It hurts and saddens my delegation to see divisive actions taken by some members during the course of this week. Action from this conference requires everyone's cooperation without any exceptions. We must have the courage to reach out to all, build bridges of trust and confidence amongst ourselves and believe in the various multilateral frameworks including the NPT. My delegation is reminded that not very long ago, this organization, our United Nations was created out of the ashes of war. In this connection we should respect our engagement within this Assembly. The devastating impact on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, speaks of the horrors, depth and devastation of nuclear weapons. To date we have not been successful in establishing a
Again on the issue of disarmament, one of the objectives of the CTBT is to enforce a comprehensive ban on all forms of nuclear tests without exception and to stop the development of nuclear weapons. The continued existence of nuclear weapons represents a significant threat to humanity. My sub region within Asia, the Pacific was used as testing grounds. We have had experiences of atmospheric as well as underground nuclear testing by a number of nuclear weapons states. Populations today continue to suffer from the impact of the
My delegation note and commend the recent pronouncement between the United States and Russia to reduce their nuclear arsenals; however the principles of transparency, verification and irreversible use of dismantled nuclear arsenals must be weaved into such arrangements. We reaffirm that the IAEA is the sole competent authority responsible for doing that. As we move forward, confidence, in the impartiality of the IAEA work and programme must be restored and upheld and avoid any politicization on the work of the IAEA.
Solomon Islands is from one of the regions that establish a nuclear weapons free zone (The 1985 treaty known as South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty - Rarotonga Treaty, contains a preamble, 16 Articles and 4 Annexes at the back) of which 13 of the 16 members of the Pacific Islands Forum are Parties to. My delegation joins others in welcoming the entry into force of similar zones in Africa and Central Asia and would like to see the establishment of such zonesIn closing, Solomon Islands reaffirms that total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee we are seeking and call for the full implementation by nuclear weapon states of their disarmament commitment under the treaty.
The political climate to abolish weapons is ripe. We need to create a safe and nuclear free world for our children and their children's children.
Thank you

 










Mr. President,

Mr. President,









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



