STATEMENT
BY
AMBASSAQOR XOLISA MABHONGO,
RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVEIGOVERWR
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE IAEA
FiRSV PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NOM-PROLlFEWTIORI OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENERAL DEBATE
30 APRIL 2012
VIENNA
Check against delivery 
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the statement of the New Agenda Coalition.
It remains South Africa's firm conviction that nuclear weapons do not guarantee security, but rather
detract from it. As long as these weapons exist, humanity will continue to face the threat of
catastrophe. The continued retention of nuclear weapons remains of concern to my delegation for as
long as these weapons exist there may be other that will seek to acquire them.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. Having listened carefully to the statements so far,
South Africa wishes to emphasise that the NPT represents a historical bargain between the nuclearweapon
States and the non-nuclear-weapon States, in terms of which the former has undertaken to
eliminate their nuclear weapons based on the reciprocal undertaking by the latter not to pursue the
nuclear weapons option.
The 2010 NPT Review Conference marked an important occasion in the history of the Treaty. This was the
first time that the Final Document of a Review Conference contained an extensive Action Plan under all
three Treaty pillars. in a very concrete way, this outcome illustrated the continued commitment of States
Parties to NPT as the foundation of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Chairperson,
Agreement on the 2010 Final Document was by no means a recognition that States Parties were satisfied
with the progress made in the implementation of past agreements. In fact, most States Parties remain
seriously concerned about the lack of urgency and seriousness with which these solemn undertakings
continue to be approached. For this reason, the success of 2010 will be determined by the extent to which
these undertakings are implemented.
The reaffirmation of the continued validity of the outcomes of 1995 and 2000, particularly the unequivocal
commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and
agreement to apply the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability in fulfillment of Treaty
obligations, provided renewed hope towards the achievement of the NPT's overall objectives.
The Treaty together with the 1995 "Principles and Objectives" and the practical steps for nuclear
disarmament agreed to in 2000 and 2010 provide a blueprint for a step-by-step process that would reduce
the threat of nuclear weapons, de-emphasize their importance and lead to their elimination.
Chairperson,
Despite positive announcements, not much concrete progress has been achieved in the area of nuclear
disarmament. We, nevertheless, welcome the steps taken towards the implementation of the New
START agreement. In this context, we recall the commitment made in the 2010 Action Plan to continue
work on achieving deeper reductions in nuclear arsenals. Reductions are indeed vital to removing the
excessive destructive capabilities developed during the Cold War, but do not substitute for concrete,
transparent, irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament measures. 
The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems provide a clear
indication that some harbour aspirations for the indefinite retention of these instruments of
destruction, contrary to their legal obligations and political commitments. The threat posed by nuclear
weapons can only be effectively addressed through the established multilateral instruments. Universal
adherence to, full implementation of and compliance with these instruments are therefore required.
South Africa appreciates the information that has been provided by some of the nuclear-weapon States
about their nuclear weapons arsenals and the implementation of their nuclear disarmament objectives.
Beyond the reporting obligations agreed to in 2010, we would encourage all five nuclear-weapon States to
further increase their efforts to enhance transparency and to build confidence among States Parties.
South Africa regards the provision of security assurances as a key element of the NPT that remains the
primary nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament agreement. The provision of such
assurances is not some ultimate objective in and of itself, but is a pragmatic, interim and practical
measure aimed at strengthening the non-proliferation regime and the objective of a nuclear-weaponfree
world.
While deeply concerned about the continuing stalemate in the Conference on Disarmament, South
Africa remains committed to the soonest resumption of substantive work, including through the
establishment of a subsidiary body that would deal with nuclear disarmament and one that would
commence negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons that
would serve both disarmament and non-proliferation objectives, as agreed to in the 2010 Action Plan.
Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the strengthened safeguards system remains an essential element of collective
efforts to address the threat posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons.Such strengthened safeguards
would contribute to establishing confidence in the peaceful application of nuclear energy, which would
greatly facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the benefit of
developing countries.
The 2010 Review Conference endorsed "the call by previous review conferences for the application of
IAEA comprehensive safeguards to all source or special fissionable material in all peaceful nuclear
activities in the States parties in accordance with the provisions of Article Ill of the Treaty". South Africa
maintains its principled position of universality of the NPT and the obligation of States Parties to conclude
agreements as required under the Treaty.
Whilst the Additional Protocol is a voluntary measure, my delegation recognizes its importance as a
confidence building measure, especially with regard to those States with advanced nuclear programmes
and facilities. South Africa is of the view that the Additional Protocol plays an indispensible role in
providing an important tool to strengthen the Agency's verification system and providing credible
assurance about the absence of undeclared nuclear material or activities.
My delegation is encouraged to note that, since the 2010 Review Conference, 4 States Parties brought
the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement into force, bringing the number of States Parties without a
CFA to 14, and 5 States Parties have brought the Additional Protocol into force bringing the number of
States Parties with Additional Protocols to 115. 
The 2010 Revcon Action Plan encourages all States "to support the development of appropriate legally
binding verification arrangements, within the context of the IAEA, to ensure the irreversible removal of
fissile material designated by each nuclear-weapon State as no longer required for military purposes".
My delegation supports the NAC proposal regarding the need for disarmament verification by the IAEA,
recognising that the verification of nuclear disarmament measures is an indispensable element in the
fulfilment of the nuclear disarmament obligations flowing from Article VI of the NPT.
South Africa supports the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones and their establishment in parts of the
world where they do not yet exist, including in the Middle East. We share the conviction that the
establishment of such zones enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
South Africa welcomes the prospect of renewed negotiations between lran and Agency, as well as the
resumption of negotiations between the EU3+3 and lran that took place in Istanbul on 14 April 2042.
South Africa urges the participants to continue to negotiate in good faith towards sustainable solutions
in line with the provisions of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Chairperson,
Global security of energy supply has become one of the key focus areas worldwide, mainly because of
decreasing natural resources, global warming, climate change, pollution and rapid global growth.
Facing the challenge of increasing energy demands, African countries, too, are looking towards nuclear
in their energy mix.
South Africa's approach to this matter is premised on the fact that peaceful nuclear co-operation and
access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, are
integral components of the Treaty. The peaceful use of nuclear technology is an inalienable right
recognized in the Treaty and is of particular relevance and importance to Africa, given the need for
sustainable and accelerated economic growth on the Continent.
As President Zuma stated at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, "nuclear energy provides not only for
the expanded opportunity to generate power needed for our development. We also derive infinite value
from its application to health, nutrition and agriculture. Our international legally binding obligations on
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation allow for the enrichment of uranium for peaceful
purposes."
South Africa recognizes the increasing role that the IAEA will have to play in the future and continues to
attach great importance to the promotional role of the Agency, as stipulated in Article II of the IAEA
Statute, aiming to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the worfd.
Many of the [AEA's TC projects are of strategic importance to developing countries, particularly in Africa,
and can provide the necessary impetus for accelerated economic development, thereby playing a
meaningful role in the achievement of the MDGs and in enhancing the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), thus contributing towards alleviating poverty in the region.Every effort should
therefore be made to ensure that IAEA resources for technical cooperation activities are sufficient,
assured and predictable and that continued efforts should be made within the lAEA to enhance the 
effectiveness and efficiency of its technical cooperation programme.
Conclusion
South Africa supports the full implementation of the NPT, as well as its universal application, in pursuit of
the ultimate goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear weapons. The international community
must redouble its efforts to achieve universal adherence to the NPT, strengthen the multilateral institutions
responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and be vigilant against any steps that could
undermine the determination of the international community as a whole, to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
The strength, credibility and continuity of the NPT rests on a fundamental bargain of the States Parties
to the NPT, which must be recognized and upheld, rather than being used by some to serve selective
interests through the perpetuation of discrimination and imbalance.
Thank you. 