I would like to begin by expressing my heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the chairmanship of this session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. My delegation is confident that under your able chairmanship, this session will indeed produce fruitful results. And I would like to assure you of my delegation's full cooperation during the deliberations by the PrepCom.
It is a source of relief that, despite initial difficulties, the first session eventually succeeded in reaching agreement on the agenda and the indicative timetable. Accordingly, we start this session with less of a burden of having to agree on complex procedural issues. In this regard, my delegation wishes to express our gratitude to Ambassador Amano of Japan, the Chairman of the first session, for the leadership he has displayed, which has been invaluable in effectively resolving the procedural deadlock.
Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Korea believes that the NPT should continue to be the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime. The three pillars the NPT stands on - nuclear disarmament, nuclear nonproliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - should be promoted in a mutually reinforcing manner. Preserving the delicate balance among them is vital to the credibility of the NPT regime.
Taking stock of global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in the recent past, my delegation is of the view that the significant challenges to the NPT continue unchecked, requiring the sustained engagement of the States Parties. These include the proliferation risks such as the DPRK and Iranian nuclear issues, insufficient progress in nuclear disarmament, and the threat from a possible combination of nuclear weapons and terrorism.
In meeting these challenges we need to squarely face the problems and weaknesses of the NPT regime, with a determination to fix and overcome them. In this context, I would like to stress the following points in our efforts to strengthen the NPT regime.
First, we cannot overestimate the significance of the IAEA safeguards in ensuring the compliance of the States with the nonproliferation obligations. Since its inception, the IAEA has played a key role in establishing an effective safeguards system. Today the Agency should be better equipped with the proper verification tools to meet new challenges. In this regard, my delegation is convinced of the need to universalize the comprehensive safeguards agreement and the Additional Protocol. We support, in particular, the Additional Protocol as the standard of IAEA safeguards and a condition of nuclear supply.
Second, the Republic of Korea attaches importance to the right to peaceful uses of nuclear power. We view this right as indispensable to sustainable development. This is not least because we depend on nuclear energy for over 40% of our electricity generation, with 20 commercial reactors in operation and eight more in the pipeline. At the same time, we believe that there should be effective safeguards against the possible abuse of this right by potential proliferators. The right under Article IV, we believe, should be conditioned on full compliance with the nonproliferation obligations set out in Articles I, II and EH
Third, my delegation reaffirms its conviction in the goal of nuclear disarmament in realizing a world free of nuclear arms. Nuclear-weapon states must do their part by making progress on nuclear disarmament, while non-nuclear-weapon states should maintain their commitment to nonproliferation. It is imperative to ensure the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). We call on those Annex 2 states whose ratification is required for the CTBT's entry into force to ratify the Treaty as soon as possible. We also call for an early commencement of negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT).
Fourth, universal adherence is essential for the viability of the NPT. We urge the three states remaining outside the Treaty to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon states without further delay. The misuse of Article X (on withdrawal) has been a focus of attention following the DPRK's announcement of withdrawal from the Treaty as early as 1993. It is now high time to consider an effective and collective response mechanism to withdrawal from the NPT. My delegation wishes to make a contribution to this debate under the relevant agenda item.
One important task we face ahead is how to mobilize the political will necessary to preserve and shore up the NPT regime. As we work through the NPT review cycle, a favorable political environment is crucial to achieve concrete results. To this end, we should strengthen our public diplomacy efforts to alert the people of the world to the dangers of nuclear proliferation and the benefits of nuclear disarmament. This will lead to more States choosing and staying on the path in favor of disarmament and against proliferation. My delegation sincerely hopes that this session will contribute to progress on that path by laying the groundwork for a successful 2010 NPT Review Conference.
Thank you.