- 1 -
[Final Version]
Statement by H.E. Ambassador SHIN Dong-ik
General Debate
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
2 May, 2017
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your
assumption of the chairmanship of the First Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. I assure you of my
delegation’s full support and cooperation during this session.
We are now at a critical juncture for the future of the NPT. After the 2015
Review Conference failed to produce a final document, there have been
skeptical reactions regarding the validity of the NPT.
However, we should not take the lack of consensus at the last Review
Conference as a failure of the review cycle or the Treaty itself. Since its entry
into force in 1970, the NPT has been the cornerstone of the nonproliferation
regime. Although the modest progress made so far in nuclear disarmament falls
short of our expectations, the achievements in the other two pillars,
nonproliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy, cannot be underestimated.
For example, the comprehensive agreement reached by E3+3/EU and Iran
stands out as one of the major achievements in nonproliferation since the 2015
Review Conference. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
demonstrates the great potential of diplomacy in resolving international 
- 2 -
concerns peacefully. The ROK hopes that all parties to the JCPOA will remain
committed to the successful implementation of the agreement.
Mr. Chairman
Just three years shy of the 50th anniversary of the Treaty, tough challenges lie
ahead of us.
First and foremost, North Korea remains the flagrant exploiter of the NPT
regime. Abusing all the benefits permitted to NPT Parties, Pyongyang acquired
nuclear technology, equipment, and materials for a clandestine nuclear weapons
programme, and then one-sidedly announced that it was leaving the Treaty and
the IAEA. Despite repeated warnings by the international community, North
Korea has continued its development of nuclear and missile capabilities.
Last year alone, North Korea conducted its fourth and fifth nuclear tests and
launched 24 ballistic missiles, violating the relevant United Nations Security
Council resolutions at least 26 times. Pyongyang is now racing toward the final
stage of nuclear weaponization.
As the missile capabilities of North Korea progress, no country will be safe
from Pyongyang’s nuclear threat. Not only that, a nuclear-armed North Korea
could shake the very foundation of the global nonproliferation regime.
We should not let such nuclear nightmare come true. On April 28, the firstever
Security Council meeting on the denuclearization of North Korea
demonstrated the sense of gravity and urgency shared by all members of the
international community. Reaffirming that North Korea’s continuous
development of nuclear weapons and missiles will significantly undermine
international peace and security as well as the global non-proliferation regime 
- 3 -
based on the NPT, Security Council members called for an action to seize this
last opportunity to stop the North Korea’s dangerous nuclear proliferation.
As continuously reaffirmed by the NPT Review Conferences and the United
Nations Security Council resolutions, North Korea cannot have the status of a
nuclear-weapon State in accordance with the Treaty under any circumstances.
Pyongyang should realize that the only option left for it is to abandon its
weapons of mass destruction programme in a complete, verifiable, irreversible
manner, return to the IAEA Safeguards, and fully comply with its obligations
under the NPT. In line with this, the ROK welcomes the IAEA’s efforts to
maintain readiness to return and re-establish safeguards-related activities in
North Korea. We underline our support for the IAEA’s role in the monitoring
and verification of the North Korean nuclear activities.
Mr. Chairman,
The ROK has been a keen supporter of the global nonproliferation regime. I
would like to take this opportunity to highlight the successful conclusion of the
2016 IAEA International Conference on Nuclear Security: Commitments and
Actions, chaired by our Foreign Minister, Yun Byung-Se. The adoption by
consensus of the Ministerial Declaration was a milestone in the international
community’s efforts to protect nuclear and other radioactive material from
malicious acts by keeping pace with evolving challenges and threats,
maintaining effective security of radioactive sources throughout their life cycle,
and taking active steps to combat illicit trafficking. The Korean government has
been also playing a constructive role in strengthening the multilateral export
control regime, as the Chairs of both the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and
the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) for the 2016-2017 terms.
Following the 26th Plenary of the NSG held in Seoul last year, Participating 
- 4 -
Governments of the NSG successfully updated the NSG Control Lists and
Guidelines. Voluntary adherence to these revised NSG Control Lists and
Guidelines will contribute to the implementation of NPT Article 3.2.
While being convinced that the NPT should remain as the cornerstone of the
nonproliferation regime, a balanced approach to the three pillars of the NPT is
vital for maintaining the credibility, integrity, and legitimacy of the Treaty. In
this regard, my delegation would like to highlight the following points as our
priorities as we prepare for the 2020 Review Conference.
First, ensuring full compliance with nonproliferation obligations is crucial for
the credibility and integrity of the NPT. In order to do this, we should clarify the
disadvantages of non-compliance.
In this regard, we need to come up with concrete proposals to counter and
discourage incidents of non-compliance. As shown by the case of North Korea,
the NPT regime currently lacks effective measures to address violations of the
Treaty. If the NPT regime remains powerless against rule breakers, the validity
of the Treaty will be constantly questioned. We need to agree on concrete
actions to effectively deal with violators of the Treaty. In particular, the issue of
withdrawal during or after violations should be seriously discussed.
A reliable mechanism for identifying non-compliance is also crucial. Since
IAEA Safeguards provide credible assurances of a State’s compliance with its
obligations, we attach great importance to the strengthening of the IAEA
Safeguards system, including by universalizing its Additional Protocol (AP).
Second, although there have been a relatively modest progress made in
nuclear disarmament compared to the other two pillars of the NPT, we should
remain committed to the centrality of the Treaty in nuclear disarmament. My
delegation shares the view that any hasty attempt to eliminate nuclear weapons 
- 5 -
all at once leaves the international security environment out of consideration,
and undermines the credibility of the NPT. In this sense, my delegation believes
that nuclear disarmament can only be achieved step-by-step following the
relevant obligations of the NPT.
At the same time, we need to work together to make progress in the overdue
promise of nuclear disarmament according to Article VI. The deepening gap
between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States on this issue
does not serve our common interests. Sincere efforts to translate the 2010
Action Plans into actions, including an early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and starting the negotiation
for a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT), would bring us closer to a world
free of nuclear weapons.
Lastly, our efforts should be focused on expanding a common ground where
States can come to an agreement. While there notably remain diverging views
on some critical issues, peaceful uses of nuclear energy is an issue around which
we can form wider consensus and build a positive momentum in our discussions
for a successful 2020 Review Conference.
Indeed, we have made substantial progress in the implementation of the 2010
Action Plan on this front. Bearing in mind that exercise of the inalienable right
to peaceful uses of nuclear energy should entail compliance with
nonproliferation and safeguards obligations, NPT Parties have worked together
to promote technical cooperation and realize the full potential of nuclear energy
in many ways. This includes support of and participation in the IAEA’s
Technical Cooperation program, the Peaceful Uses Initiatives (PUI), and other
programs; efforts to draw lessons from the Fukushima Accident and further
enhance nuclear safety; and the establishment of an enduring nuclear security
architecture. In this context, the ROK will provide full support for the success
of the International Conference on Technical Cooperation in May and
International Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in October which will
be held later in this 60th anniversary year of the IAEA.
- 6 -
Mr. Chairman,
These are important achievements that we have made together and they
should serve as a solid foundation in moving our discussion forward. It is our
view that we should continue our work to strengthen the third pillar of the NPT
and that this will contribute to our finding the Treaty valuable, and thus make
the NPT regime stronger and more relevant.
To do that, all NPT Parties should accept responsibility for making concrete
actions, especially as described by the 2010 Action Plan, to promote all three
pillars of the Treaty. Bearing in mind that this review cycle is critical in
reaffirming the validity of the Treaty, we should work together to make
meaningful progress.
I would like to conclude by expressing my wish for the success of the 2020
Review Process.
Thank you. /END/