Madam Chair,
I wish to first of all extend, on behalf of the Government of Spain and on my own behalf,
congratulations for your election as President of the Review Conference to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. We value the commitment of your country, Algeria, and your
own, to all issues related to peace and international security. Spain will support your efforts to
bring about a successful meeting.
This Conference offers a great opportunity to carry out an assessment of the implementation of
the Plan of Action adopted at the 2010 Review Conference, with the final goal of strengthening a
Treaty that has made a great contribution to international peace and security. The NPT is the
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation regime. It is the most valuable instrument at our
disposal to advance the process of nuclear disarmament, and it is the framework that includes the
inalienable right of all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
We gather here today to address problems and to find solutions. We hope that the draft
agreement reached in Lausanne last 2 April on Iran's nuclear program could materialize in the
coming weeks. Spain welcomes this initial agreement as an important step in resolving this
dispute, and it is the result of tough diplomatic negotiations. Negotiation is the only way to resolve
issues of this complexity.
As stated by His Majesty the King before the General Assembly last 24 September, Spain firmly
believes in the United Nations and in multilateral mechanisms to preserve international peace and
security. In this context, Spain wishes to reaffirm its willingness to move towards a world without
nuclear weapons as the ultimate goal of a process within the framework of the NPT.
Spain aligns itself with the statement just delivered by the High Representative of the European
Union.
Madam Chair,
Spain wishes that this Conference could renew the commitment of all States Parties in fulfilling
their obligations under the NPT and my country is looking forward to working towards achieving its
goals and its full globalization. We wish to emphasize the importance of the Plan of Action
adopted by consensus in 2010 as a reference point in the effective implementation of the Treaty.
We wish to reiterate the importance of complying with the provisions of Article VI of the Treaty on
the issue of nuclear disarmament, taking into account the particular responsibility of the countries
with the largest arsenals. In this context, we welcome the agreements signed by States
possessing these weapons, and we encourage them to make an effort to make ambitious
commitments on nuclear disarmament matters.
Like many other countries, Spain attaches great interest to the debate on the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. This debate highlights the need to
promote the nuclear disarmament process. We believe it must be addressed realistically and
gradually within the NPT framework, and it should count on the partiCipation of the nuclear
powers.
In 2016, it will be twenty years since the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT), which has not yet entered into force. Spain calls upon the countries that have not yet
signed or ratified it to do so as soon as possible.
Spain also considers it necessary to begin negotiations within the Conference on Disarmament in
Geneva for the adoption of a Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices (FMCT). 
My country wishes to express its firm support for the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva as
the only body established for the negotiation of multilateral treaties on disarmament, and we
therefore regret the paralysis it seems to experience for too many years now.
Madam Chair,
On the issue of non-proliferation, Spain strongly supports IAEA's authority and the strengthening
of its verification and monitoring capabilities. Spain calls for the universal application of the
Additional Protocol as a verifying criteria, together with the Safeguard Agreements, as a measure
of transparency and a guarantee of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by all countries.
Spain believes that convening a Conference for the Establishment of a Weapons of Mass
Destruction Free Zone and their launching systems in the Middle East is a matter of crucial
importance in order to increase security and stability in the region. We acknowledge the efforts of
the Facilitator, Ambassador Laajava, in accordance with the commitment made in the 2010 Action
Plan , and we call upon the parties to convene this Conference immediately.
Spain considers that the aforementioned draft agreement between the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the EU3+3 is an important step forward to ensure the exclusive peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear program. We trust it will give a positive impetus to the NPT, and that it will open a path for
regional dialogue in matters of security.
Spain condemns the nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(DPRK) and makes an appeal to the DPRK to abandon its nuclear program, return to the NPT
and apply the IAEA safeguards.
Madarn Chair,
Spain wishes to reaffirm its support for the inalienable right of all States Parties to the NPT to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without any discrirnination, as established in the Treaty. We
hope this Review Conference will show support for the responsible development of peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, within the framework of rneasures relating to non-proliferation and security.
The international cornmunity is aware of the risk involved in diverting sensitive materials and
technologies to non-state actors for terrorist purposes. We strongly support all efforts towards
making progress in the fight against the asymmetric proliferation of nuclear weapons under
Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004). To this end, we have the honour and responsibility to
preside over its Committee. We also support all efforts to strengthen physical nuclear security,
and in this area, Spain actively participates in other international initiatives such as the Nuclear
Security Summit system and the Global Initiative to fight against Nuclear Terrorism (IGTN).
Madam Chair,
I would like to express my confidence that all States gathered here will search for the best way to
reach a consensus agreement. It will entail concessions and commitments, allowing us to move
forward in implementing the 2010 Plan of Action and achieving a balanced development of the
three fundamental pillars of the Treaty.
We live in a complex world, and it is our responsibility to offer solutions. You can count on Spain
for that.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 