
Mr. President,
At the outset and on behalf of Spain, I would like to congratulate you on your election as President of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We are well aware of and appreciate the commitment of your country, the Philippines, to all questions relating to world peace and security. I would like to reiterate the commitment of the Government of Spain, recently expressed to President Macapagal-Arroyo, to support you, Mr. Chairman, in leading a successful meeting.
I would also like to align myself with the statement made by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on behalf of the European Union. The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty constitutes a fundamental change in the mechanisms of international representation of the European Union, and Spain is pleased to have contributed to the promotion of a multilateral action on the part of the EU that is more effective, more integrated and more visible.
Mr. President,
I believe that the we have before us today an opportunity that we cannot, and must not, miss to renew and strengthen the important pact that is the NPT, reviewing it in light of today's international reality. At this conference, we need to come to an agreement on an ambitious action plan that will advance nuclear disarmament, prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and strengthen the security of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Our wish to contribute to the efforts towards the success of this conference ultimately stems from the firm commitment of the Government of Spain, expressed by the President of the Spanish Government before the United Nations General Assembly in September 2009, to contribute to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons - as also expressed by the President of the United States in Prague in April 2009 - and to the defining of a consensus and the concrete steps that will allow us to continue to irreversibly advance towards the fulfillment of this yearning of so many peoples and nations.
We need to support the current momentum on nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, supporting proposals that encourage multilateralism and that seek new consensus and international agreements. The unanimous approval of resolution 1887 (2009) by Heads of State and Government meeting in the Security Council on 24 September 2009, was an enormously positive step and outlined an ambitious and complex agenda.
We all share a common belief, that security and disarmament are complementary and mutually reinforcing. There can be no disarmament without security, nor will there be full security if we do not advance towards disarmament. Today, new threats to international peace and security are linked to proliferation and illicit trafficking of weapons of mass destruction by non-state actors (terrorist groups) and States outside of or in violation of international law. A few weeks ago at the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, participating States recognized that nuclear terrorism was one of the most serious threats to international security and requires the maintenance of the highest standards of nuclear security as a preventative measure. From compliance with the existing international legal framework (Convention on the physical protection of nuclear material and the International Convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism) to the substitution of highly enriched uranium for lowly enriched uranium in nuclear reactors, and to end the production of plutonium.
We commence this conference in a spirit of optimism and trusting that we can forge a new consensus of the international community on strengthening the international disarmament and non-proliferation regime that the NPT embodies.
We are confident that this renewed political drive will lead to a more secure world free of nuclear weapons and one in which the inalienable right to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes will result in the adoption of a balanced political document containing advances in and strong commitments to the three pillars of the NPT: nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
All aspects of the NPT are interrelated and complementary.
1. Today, more than at any other moment over recent decades, and primarily due to the political will of the states with nuclear weapons, nuclear disarmament (in the terms reflected in art. VI of the NPT) has become a realistic ambition.
This conference begins at an auspicious moment of positive advances between the two nuclear-weapon States holding 95% of the world's nuclear arsenals. The signing of the new agreement on Strategic Arms Reduction between the Russian Federation and the United States is a very positive step, one that will undoubtedly open the way to new rounds of global nuclear arms reduction, both strategic and sub-strategic.
The adoption of a new nuclear posture review on the part of the United States Administration is also a step of great significance towards the establishment of a new climate towards disarmament and of the U.S. leadership in this field. We welcome the decreased role of nuclear weapons in security strategy and the commitment to not develop new nuclear weapons.
Spain welcomes the commitment of the U.S. administration to the early ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and may this new attitude encourage other countries that have not yet done so to accede to the treaty.
We need to emphasize the importance of the agreement reached in the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva in May 2009 for the commencement of the negotiation of a verifiable treaty for the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons ("cut-off" / FMCT). It is vital to overcome the procedural obstacles that continue to prevent the start of these negotiations which are of crucial importance to the future of the general disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
We must continue undertaking the required efforts to achieve the full universalization of the NPT. The principles and objectives of the Non Proliferation Treaty constitute the shared security objectives of all countries. As such, the entire international community, in particular, the three countries which have still not acceded to the NPT, must adhere to its terms. In addition, it is crucial to assess the consequences and adopt the appropriate measures in case of a notice of withdrawal from the NPT, as in the case of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, in conformity with art. X of the Treaty, with the goal of preserving the authority and integrity of the Treaty, and of respecting compliance with IAEA safeguards agreements.
It is essential that we find mechanisms to advance towards the implementation of the Resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference so that we can begin the process leading to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. The importance that Spain and the entire European Union attach to the achievement of new advances in the peace process in the Middle East and the numerous efforts that we have made and continue to make with all involved parties are well-known. I believe that all concrete decisions that we can adopt will significantly contribute to increasing mutual trust among the countries of the region and, therefore, towards stability and regional and global security. Spain supports initiatives in the context of the NPT, including appointing a coordinator and the convening of a Conference with all countries of the region, that will allow us to move forward with determination towards the objective we agreed in 1995 in a realistic manner, with the consensus of all, and with a positive impact on the development of the peace process.
At this NPT Review Conference, we must strengthen the international regime that we have forged in the field of nuclear proliferation, that is, strong backing of the authority of the IAEA, including the strengthening of its verification and monitoring capabilities. Spain, along with the entire European Union, promotes the universal implementation of the Additional Protocol as today's verification standard, along with safeguards agreements, as transparency and confidence- building measures for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by all State Parties to the NPT.
5.1 have to also mention two issues of nuclear proliferation that today constitute a serious failure of NPT compliance: the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Security Council has intervened on these matters and its Resolutions must be respected and complied with, aiming at restoring the confidence of the international community and eventually leading to progress towards strengthening regional stability and security. For this reason, we urge these two countries to comply with the provisions of the United Nations Security Council, within the shortest possible delay.
6. We must clearly reaffirm the right of every country to develop civil nuclear programmes, in conformity with the NPT. However, international circumstances have changed since 1968 and today, more and more countries have started projects to develop nuclear energy to address their growing energy needs, to promote sustainable development, and to respond to the challenges presented by climate change. Therefore, it is only logical to seek together mechanisms to ensure the responsible use of nuclear energy in the best conditions of security, safety and non-proliferation. Proposals aimed at developing multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, like the IAEA "Nuclear Fuel Bank", must not be perceived as new constraints on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, but rather as initiatives that are cost-effective as well as adapted to the times in which we live.
Mr. President,
In all diplomatic negotiations, trust and good faith play a determining role. For this reason, I would like to express my confidence that all State Parties to the NPT are, in fact, seeking in good faith a global agreement which will include concessions and compromises for all parties and which will allow us to set some balanced future-oriented objectives to preserve the regime established by the NPT. Spain, also as rotating Presidency of the European Union, will spare no effort to reach this global agreement as we are convinced that this is an opportunity that the international community cannot afford to miss.
Thank you, Mr. President.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



