1
Statement
by
H.E Dr. Rohan Perera
Ambassador & Permanent Representative
of Sri Lanka to the United Nations
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
27 April to 22 May 2015
At the outset let me express the deepest condolences of the people and the government
of Sri Lanka to the people of Nepal affected by the recent earthquake. The government
of Sri Lanka has actively engaged in the international relief efforts in Nepal. We are
confident that the traditional resilience of the people of Nepal together with the spirit
of solidarity and goodwill of the international community will help the rebuilding
efforts of the government of Nepal.
We extend warm felicitations to Ambassador Taous Feroukhi and members of the
Bureau. I’m confident that Ambassador Feroukhi’s commitment to the cause of
disarmament and her long experience as Permanent Representative of Algeria to IAEA
in Vienna will contribute in bringing our deliberations to a fruitful conclusion.
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
2
Today, we gather five years after the 2010 NPT Review Conference. It is a moment for
sober reflection. It is also a moment to chart a way forward avoiding the pitfalls of the
past, and to grasp the reality of the emerging world order. A fundamental shift in the
mindset of reliance on nuclear disarmament is essential if we are to achieve the 3
pillars of the NPT namely nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This Review Conference is the test of our collective
resolve and goodwill to strive towards realizing a world, free of nuclear weapons and
other forms of weapons of mass destruction.
The 2010 outcome was then hailed as a ground-breaking deal in the nuclear nonproliferation
discourse. However, as our experiences in the recent years have
demonstrated, the aftermath of the 2010 Conference proved no different from previous
review conferences that have preceded. It was ironical that the promise in some of the
most important areas agreed to in 2010 has given way to skepticism, with mixed
results in some areas and no progress in many others.
Progress on Nuclear disarmament, the central component of the treaty regime, has
been stalled for several years with no effective action taken to follow it through to
success, despite pious exhortations. The “peaceful uses” concept has had to face many
an obstacle in its path towards practical realization in many developing countries. The
promise of non-proliferation itself was observed in the breach, with one or two regions
specifically moving in the opposite direction.
This stalemate cannot continue. Its continuance can only be at the expense of
collective security of humanity. New and emerging conflicts have the potential risk of
jeopardizing human civilizations.
As a country which has always stood at the forefront of regional and global nonproliferation
and disarmament efforts, Sri Lanka believes that the need for achieving a
world free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction is now more urgent
than ever. We cannot continue with business as usual approach, convening every five
years a review conference in New York and unwinding in between, all that was agreed.
We would like to take this opportunity to reassure the global community that Sri 
3
Lanka remains committed to striving with all States and other Stakeholders, to make
nuclear disarmament realizable and bring peaceful uses of nuclear technology within
reach. As with other countries which are party to the NPT, we consider that we have
an inalienable right to peaceful use of nuclear technology as provided for in Article IV
of the NPT. Equally, there is a shared responsibility to work towards eventual
elimination of nuclear weapons as provided for Article VI of the NPT. It is regrettable
that the obligation to negotiate in good faith to achieve the objective of total
elimination of nuclear weapons remains largely unfulfilled despite the 1996 Advisory
opinion of the ICJ.
The 2000 NPT Review Conference, conscious of the challenges facing both State
parties to NPT as well as non-parties and recognizing the symbiotic link between
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, had agreed, as a realistic way out
on a set of practical steps to achieve progress. NPT Review Conference in 2010
reiterated the importance of these practical steps and urged their expeditious
implementation on a priority basis. Ten years after their adoption, these 13 practical
steps remain largely unrealized, and progress in the broad areas covered by some of
these steps, if any, is limited.
Sri Lanka has reiterated in the 2010 NPT Review Conference, and subsequently in the
CTBTO Ministerial Meetings, that it is taking steps to ratify the CTBT as early as
possible. As part of our nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation priorities,
ratification of CTBT is now recognized as an imperative need. Sri Lanka is planning a
number of activities with CTBTO in the coming years, with a regional on-site
Inspection Training programme towards end of this year. This is a manifestation of Sri
Lanka’s commitment to realizing the goals set by CTBT.
We do recognize the importance of safeguards and verification system available under
the NPT. We are currently studying the Additional Protocol to Safeguards Agreement
and the benefits it offers for parties, in the area of verification.
We do not need to over-emphasize the increasing role of nuclear security in an era
where nuclear material and technology reaching the hands of non-state actors 
4
remains a distinct and dangerous possibility. We call for support for IAEA's emergency
and incident reporting system. The Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear
Materials is a centerpiece in the legal architecture for nuclear security. In addition, the
international convention on the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism provides a
comprehensive legal framework to prevent nuclear material falling into unlawful
hands.
While efforts should continue towards the objective of general and complete
disarmament, a new paradigm has resulted in the nuclear discourse, which makes it
imperative to achieve nuclear disarmament based on humanitarian norms. This is
pursuant to the emphasis placed by the NPT Review Conference in 2010, which
expressed concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use, or
threat of use of nuclear weapons. This movement has now made steady progress
bringing within its sweep a large number of states and civil society organizations,
clamoring for decisive change in thinking given the grave danger posed to humanity by
nuclear weapons. Sri Lanka values the work being done in this area including by civil
society and think tanks and extend its fullest support for this initiative.
Sri Lanka welcomes the understanding reached in Lausanne, Switzerland between
Iran and the EU3+3 on Iran’s nuclear programme and hopes that a final agreement
will be reached as scheduled in June this year.
Sri Lanka reiterates its support for Iran’s efforts to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and join the international community’s efforts in the peaceful pursuit of
nuclear technology under oversight by the IAEA and within the framework of the NPT.
We also wish to reiterate the importance of reconvening in the near future, the
Conference on Middle East as a Zone free of Weapons of Mass Destruction, which did
not take place in 2012, as envisaged in the decision made by 2010 NPT Review
Conference. Efforts need to be renewed with greater political will in consultation with
all parties, to set the process in motion in a time-bound manner, to make the proposal
a reality. 
5
We would also like to highlight the importance of peace education and disarmament
education. In this connection, I refer to the initiative taken in Sri Lanka by Judge C.G.
Weeramantry, former Judge and Vice President of the International Court of Justice,
in establishing the Weeramantry International Center for Peace Education and
Research (WICPER) in 2001. The Centre has taken a series of meaningful measures to
disseminate peace education, cross-cultural understanding, and international law,
particularly among school children.
In conclusion Madame Chair, Sri Lanka reaffirms its support for efforts by all States
Parties to the NPT towards the objective of achieving the 3 pillars of the NPT, namely
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy
that would contribute to the progress and prosperity of humankind.
***