Allow me at the outset, to congratulate on your appointment as Chairman of the 3fd Preparatory Committee of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. My delegation stands ready to extend to you and all State Parties, our utmost cooperation to ensure the success of this Committee. We are also associating ourselves with the Statement made on behalf of the Non Aligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman
The NPT has remained a cornerstone of global efforts in achieving nuclear disarmament and dealing with the challenges pertaining to non proliferation. It also provided an agreed frame work to ensure the access to all State parties without exception or discrimination, the benefits derived from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The assessment of the efficacy and utility of the Treaty in achieving its declared objectives must be based on the degree to which, States parties have diligently complied with the provisions of the Treaty in all its aspects.
Mr. Chairman
Our goal is to achieve full implementation of the Treaty as well as its universality. This should be done on the basis that all parties have agreed obligations to discharge and rights to exercise. We must also work on formulating practical and effective measures to address the challenges faced by the Treaty. Primarily, achieving NPT universality and determining the most appropriate means through which to implement the various outcomes of the previous Review Conferences, is important. The core of the NPT where States undertook not to acquire nuclear weapons on the basis that all State parties would work for their elimination should not be forgotten. In recent years, a great deal of attention has been paid to the threat of nuclear proliferation. However, nuclear disarmament and nuclear non proliferation are inextricably linked and both, therefore, require parallel progress.
To this end, it is important to determine the most appropriate means to implement the various outcomes of previous Review Conferences. The 1995 principles and objectives as well as the practical and progressive steps for nuclear disarmament agreed to in 2000 represent the consensual blue print for a step by step process that would reduce the threat of nuclear weapons, deemphasize their importance and lead to their elimination.
We reiterate the importance of the peaceful cooperation and access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy pursuant to Article (iv) of the Treaty are integral to the success of the NPT. The peaceful use of nuclear energy is linked to nuclear disarmament and nuclear non proliferation obligations of the Treaty and none of these elements exist in isolation. In recent years, expanding global energy demand and efforts to prevent global warming have brought about the so-called nuclear renaissance debate. The promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy appears gaining momentum. The use of nuclear power must be accompanied by commitment to effective implementation of nuclear non proliferation, safeguards, safety and security. It is even more important for the international community to reconfirm common understanding that ensuring safeguards, safety and security constitutes an indispensable part of the necessary infrastructure for the introduction of nuclear power generation. Sri Lanka underscores the importance of the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Therefore, use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes without any discrimination and non discriminatory transfer of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes should be fully assured and promoted. The IAEA plays a central role in this regard and the State parties therefore should fully commit themselves to provide the IAEA with the necessary support and assistance to fulfill its Statutory Mandate.
Mr Chairman
Sri Lanka welcomes the reductions made by the nuclear weapon States in their nuclear arsenals. We consider this as a positive step towards compliance with Article Vi of the Treaty and with decision of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and the consensus at the 2000 Review Conference. We reiterate, however that such partial reductions do not yet meet the expectations of the vast majority of State parties. This is specially the case in the light of qualitative developments undertaken in nuclear arsenals which reaffirm the utility of nuclear weapons in nuclear deterrence as a salient feature in their strategic security policies. This situation casts serious doubts on commitments to nuclear disarmament and the implementation of Article (vi) and thus disrupts the delicate balance upon which the Treaty is founded and operated. In addition, it enhances the risks associated with emphasizing the value of the nuclear weapons in achieving security and thus increases the potential of the proliferation of those weapons. It undermines the overwhelming desire of the people to have a world free of nuclear weapons.
The threat posed by nuclear weapons only strengthens calls for the conclusion at an early date, of a multilateral agreement on effective legally binding arrangements to non nuclear weapons States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. Pursuant to the 1995 NPT Review Conference decision, it is unjustifiable for nuclear weapon States to continue maintaining nuclear military postures towards non nuclear weapon States that are in compliance with their Treaty obligations. Both nuclear and non nuclear weapon States are bound by the same Treaty and thus should equally benefit from the security it is designed to provide.
Mr Chairman
The review cycle must redouble its efforts to formulate suggestions on practical measures which will contribute towards achieving NPT goals in all aspects. We call upon all State parties to exert all possible efforts to promote universal adherence and not to undertake any actions that can negatively affect disarmament, nonproliferation and peaceful uses, objectives of the Treaty.
We also stress the importance of developed countries in facilitating and assisting legitimate developments of nuclear energy of the non-nuclear States parties by allowing them to participate to the fullest in the possible transfer of nuclear equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes. There should be no effort to undermine the inalienable rights of non-nuclear countries in that regard.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka reaffirms the importance of ensuring the commitment of the international community to the multilateral character of nuclear disarmament and non proliferation. We reiterate our faith in the ability of the 2010 Review Conference to achieve positive steps towards NPT universality and balanced implementation of all of the Treaty Provisions and the consensus outcomes of the 1995 and 2000 Conferences. We must build on it and not regress. There seems to be a conducive atmosphere to do that if we endeavour to address difficulties and maximize opportunities in a spirit of give and take. That was how a consensus was achieved in 1995, when Sri Lanka had the honour to chair the Conference.