Statement
Second Meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of the
Nuclear Weapons (NPT):
Item 4 - General Debate on Issues Related to all Aspects of the Work of
the Preparatory Committee
by
H.E. Mr. A.LA. Azeez,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of SriLanka
to the UN in Geneva
24th April 2018
The Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the United Nations
and other International Organizations in Geneva
Mr. President,
Excellencies, delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Sri Lanka expresses its full support and cooperation for the work of this
Committee under your able stewardship. We note the diverse aspects of the
discussions that emerged in Vienna where the First Preparatory Meeting was
held last year. We strongly believe that our deliberations during this second
Prep-Com would build on these aspects and help move forward the NPT
Agenda.
It is imperative that all our efforts be geared to ensuring that the 2020 Review
Conference will lead to a consensus outcome, which galvanizes the
commitments made in the 1995 Review Conference. Securing a world free
of nuclear weapons should remain our first and foremost priority.
Mr. President,
The NPT provides an international framework for advancing nuclear nonproliferation,
peaceful use of nuclear energy and nuclear disarmament.
These are the 'core' components of the Treaty on which States Parties have
committed themselves to implement their obligations. These in our view are
inter linked and are mutually reinforcing. General and comprehensive
elimination of all nuclear weapons remains the ultimate goal that should be
reached through progressive steps. The reality today, however, is a
pronounced lack of will to progressively move forward in this area. Instead,
an increasing tendency has been observed of seeking refuge behind
terminologies , such as 'incremental approach', 'step-by-step approach',
'progressive realization'. Today, we have come to a stage in the peace and
security discourse where such terminologies are no longer seen to have any
practical value or meaning. Any serious, concerted efforts towards adopting
a comprehensive package at the 2020 NPT Review must be bolstered by
reaffirmation of a clear commitment by all parties to all the obligations and
the Principles of the NPT.
Mr. President,
Sri Lanka reiterates the importance of the NPT as the global regime for
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament which ensures a balanced and
non-discriminatory approach to building international peace and security,
while safeguarding the economic development prospects for all, through
equal access to technology advancing peaceful uses. We support all efforts
towards achieving the universalizationof the NPT as the legal regime that
enjoys the participationof the largest number of Member States of the United
Nations including the P5. We also support the call for application of the full
scope of the IAEA safeguards to ensure meaningful implementation of the
provisions in theTreaty.
Lack of progress in the effective implementation of Article VI is a worrying
trend. Moving away from this realistic path to disarmament may lend itself,
in the medium to long term, to a possible re-emergence of an arms race, with
far reaching consequences for humanity if it happened. It is important to
recall at this point, that the commitments contained in the 1995 NPT Review
package, particularly with regard to disarmament had been secured as a
result of State parties agreeing to extend the NPT regime in the first place,
without prejudice to the already ingrained obligation towards disarmament in
the treaty.
Mr. President,
As we address the dichotomy between the lack of progress in disarmament
and increasing emphasis and efforts on non-proliferation, we take this
opportunity to call upon all states parties with the ability to do so, to manifest
their clear commitment to the principle of disarmament by enhancing their
support for, and investment in, disarmament training and education provided
by the UN and other organisations including in the developing countries.
Such programmes will particularly help developing countries to harness the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology and energy, while contributing to
international peace and security measures. That will also enable networking
and coordination among states, strengthening understanding and
cooperation in other important areas such as nuclearsecurity.
We do not need to overemphasize right of all NNWS who are Parties to the
NPT to receive effective, universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory,
irrevocable and legally binding security assurances against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons under all circumstances. We recall in this regard
the July 1996 ICJ Advisory Opinion on the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons. Given the scale of death and destruction that couldarise
from the use of nuclear weapons and the humanitarian consequences that
may ensue, it is the collective call of humanity, as captured in the letter and
spirit of the ICJ Advisory Opinion, to support the deliberations and initiatives
on developing mechanisms to seek to prevent such catastrophes in future.
Mr. President,
IAEA's role in the advancement of nuclear technology for sustainable
development and activities related to peaceful uses in countries that are
states parties to NPT- as the main channel for such cooperation, is much
appreciated. Application of the IAEA selection criteria and guidelines for
transferring technology and knowhow through bilateral cooperation projects
must continue to apply in a transparent and objective manner.
A nuclear security infrastructure linking nuclear safety regime and peaceful
uses framework at the national level, is pivotal to an environment which
leaves no room for vulnerabiliites to be exploited by persons or groups with
malicious intent. The civil society and the media too have a vital role to play
in preventing threats to nuclear security and preventing any malicious use.
In conclusion, Mr. President,
We propose that this Meeting come up with elements and guidelines that will
help a time bound and pragmatic action plan and outcome to emerge at the
2020 NPT Review. Building a better and secure future for all of us and for
the generations to come is a shared call that we can shirk only at our own
peril.
I thank you.