1
Statement delivered by H.E. Priyanee Wijesekera,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative for Sri Lanka
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
General Debate on 02 May 2017
Mr Chairman,
1. I wish to extend my warm felicitations to you on your assumption of the
Chair of the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I
also wish to congratulate other Bureau Members on their election.
2. Let me also thank Her Excellency Taous Feroukhi, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Algeria, President of the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, for her opening remarks and important work during the previous
session.
3. Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement delivered by H.E. Mr Jesse Alonso
Chacon Escamillo, Ambassador of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on
behalf of the Non Aligned Movement.
Mr Chairman,
4. Before reflecting on the substantive aspects of relevance for our
deliberations today, I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the late
Justice C.G. Weeramanthry whose dissenting opinion in the 1996 ICJ
Advisory Opinion on the legality of the Threat or use of Nuclear Weapons
enunciated the notion of illegality of nuclear weapons and thus inspired the
nuclear disarmament community and advocates for over twenty years.
5. This meeting marks the beginning of the 2020 Review Cycle of the NPT and
provides the opportunity to chart the way forward and work towards a
successful Review Conference in 2020 with tangible and productive
outcomes. It is important therefore to commence this process with the
constructive and inclusive dialogue to find agreement on moving the
disarmament and non-proliferation agenda forward. 
2
6. My delegation wishes to reiterate the centrality of the NPT as the
cornerstone of the global regime for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. Sri Lanka is in favour of a balanced and non-discriminatory
approach in addressing the three pillars of the NPT.
7. It is essential that this Review Process aims to strengthen the three pillars of
the NPT, namely nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in order to safeguard the world from
devastation by nuclear weapons and to contribute to economic development
and prosperity through the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
8. Disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually re-enforcing and absolutely
essential in the present global context for international peace and security. It
is crucial therefore, that the slow pace of progress in efforts to reduce and
eliminate nuclear weapons as well as proliferation concerns are addressed
through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and nondiscriminatory
agreements.
9. The NPT is the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament
and also for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which is vital for economic
development, particularly in developing non-nuclear weapon states. Nonproliferation
policies should therefore not undermine the inalienable rights
of States to acquire, have access to, import or export nuclear material,
equipment or technology for peaceful purposes. It must be kept in mind that
countries which are Party to the Treaty have an inalienable right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, without discrimination, as provided for in Article IV
of the NPT.
Mr Chairman,
10.Sri Lanka has always been at the forefront of global non-proliferation and
disarmament efforts and is committed to striving with other States and
Stakeholders to make nuclear disarmament realizable through a transparent,
sustainable and credible plan in order to achieve the shared goal of a world
free of nuclear weapons.
11.This is reflected in the international treaty obligations we have undertaken in
the field of disarmament.
12.The threat posed by nuclear weapons to humanity and its catastrophic
humanitarian consequences is a matter for serious concern, as no State or 
3
international organization can adequately address a humanitarian emergency
caused by a nuclear detonation. At the 2015 Review Conference, 159 State
Parties including Sri Lanka supported the view that awareness of the
consequences of nuclear weapons must underpin all approaches and efforts
towards nuclear disarmament. We extend our fullest support to finding a
solution to counter the challenge of nuclear weapons.
13.Further, the threat posed by the possibility of nuclear material falling into the
hands of non-state actors or terrorist entities and its terrible consequences
highlights the need for international efforts to address this danger. We
recommend widest possible adherence to the International Convention for
the Suppression of Nuclear Terrorism of 2005, which provides a
comprehensive legal framework to prevent nuclear material falling into
unlawful hands.
14.It is clear that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. States
therefore, have an obligation to negotiate in good faith to achieve this
objective, as provided for in Article VI of the NPT.
15.Sri Lanka supports negotiating a comprehensive, legally binding
international instrument which builds on existing normative frameworks in
the field of disarmament, to prohibit the use, possession as well as
production and transfer of nuclear weapons leading towards their total
elimination, within a time bound framework. We therefore welcome the
convening of the United Nations conference in March 2017 to negotiate such
an instrument, which will build on the existing disarmament framework
including the NPT.
Mr Chairman
16.In conclusion, Sri Lanka fully supports efforts by all States Parties to the
NPT towards achieving a successful conclusion of the First Preparatory
Committee and looks forward to a constructive engagement during the
forthcoming deliberations.