Full version
NPT Prep Com 2018 – General Debate – Statement by Sweden
Mr. Chair,
Let me congratulate you on assuming the important task of chairing the
second Prep Com of this Review Cycle. I can assure you of the full
support and cooperation from the Swedish delegation.
Sweden associates itself with the general statement by the European
Union, as well as the one delivered on behalf of the Nordic countries.
Sweden is also part of the Vienna Group of Ten. I will now make some
additional observations from a national perspective.
We are witnessing a deeply worrisome renaissance for nuclear weapons.
In words and deeds, nuclear weapon states signal an increased reliance
on these uniquely destructive weapons – removing us further from our
common goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. Against this backdrop
the concerns for the increased risk of the use of nuclear weapons is
deeply felt by governments as well as civil society.
Meanwhile multilateralism is being challenged putting the international
community under pressure.
When the current review cycle was launched, in a constructive manner,
in Vienna last year, the general assessment was that the challenges rarely
had been more demanding. If anything, those challenges seem even
more daunting today – one year on. Both from a disarmament and a
non-proliferation point of view, the NPT edifice is under great stress.
Yet, we must not resign but rather redouble our efforts. The united
message coming out of the Review Conference in 2020 must be a reaffirmation
of our joint commitment to this indispensable framework.
The alternative scenario, another failed conference, would inevitably
undermine the treaty just when we need it the most. 
Mr. Chair,
We must now start to rebuild some degree of trust and understanding
for each other’s perspectives. With an ambitious and realistic mindset,
we should now proceed to identify issues which could constitute
common ground.
This will take an element of flexibility and adaptation from everyone,
starting with a universal acknowledgement that the basic logic at the
heart of the NPT continues to apply: the three pillars of the treaty are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Progress will not be possible
unless it is broadly perceived as balanced. Furthermore, both nuclear and
non-nuclear weapon states need to abstain from using the Prohibition
Treaty divisively, in a way which could undermine the NPT.
On their part, nuclear weapon states should refrain from putting forward
the global security environment as a pretext for inaction. We need to see
a clear-cut commitment from them to make the review cycle a success.
This should include progress on outstanding NPT obligations, not least
by addressing the implementation deficit still plaguing the disarmament
section of the 2010 Action Plan.
From non-nuclear weapon states, we need a full and pragmatic
engagement covering all three pillars – an engagement underpinned by a
recognition that also intermediate steps can be worthwhile
accomplishments: do not the make the perfect the enemy of the good.
Mr. Chair,
A good place to start looking for common ground should be riskreduction
and transparency measures.
Indeed, in view of the gradually increasing risks of nuclear use, few
things seem more urgent than the elaboration of an effective riskreduction
agenda in the run up to the 2020 Review Conference. Items on
such an agenda could include “de-alerting” and “de-mating” measures, 
avoidance of mixing nuclear and conventional capabilities, addressing
cyber threats and re-establishment of diplomatic and military crisis
communication channels. Enhanced transparency – be it regarding
doctrines or arsenals – should also be part of the package, as should
strengthened negative security assurances.
Existing and new issue-specific or political groupings could facilitate and
help us avoid getting stuck in diplomatic disarmament trenches. Sweden
intends to take active part in such efforts.
Developments regarding nuclear arms control will weigh heavily on the
NPT review cycle. Here, there is ample ground for concern. The future
of the INF is at risk – and a Europe without INF would be a less secure
Europe. The preservation of the Treaty is therefore critical. We call on
the US and Russia to continue the dialogue in order to resolve the
serious concerns about Russia’s compliance. In this context, we also
strongly encourage the US and Russia – as the overwhelmingly largest
nuclear-weapon possessors – to extend the New START treaty, or,
preferably, seek further reductions covering strategic and non-strategic,
deployed and non-deployed warheads.
Nuclear disarmament verification could offer additional domains of
common ground. In the Swedish experience, verification cooperation is
meaningful and rewarding. Through the IPNDV and QVNP projects,
we have gained a better understanding of the challenges involved and
how these can be overcome. This includes effective ways of addressing
proliferation concerns. Verification enhances transparency, builds
confidence and – by creating the necessary technical capabilities – could
facilitate effective and credible implementation of future agreements.
Sweden encourages more nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states to
engage in this field.
Mr. Chair,
The dreadful scenario of the DPRK possessing an operative nuclear
ICBM capability appear closer than ever. The DPRK must abandon its
nuclear weapons and missile program in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner. As a non-permanent member of the UN Security
Council, Sweden has insisted on combining a policy of pressure,
including more effective implementation of sanctions, with a readiness to
support diplomatic efforts, as called for by the UN Security Council. We
all have an obligation to pursue a peaceful solution to the situation.
Meanwhile, the JCPOA faces profound challenges. Sweden, together
with the EU, remains firm in its support to the agreement and expects all
parties to continue to fully implement it. A failure in this regard would
be seriously detrimental in many ways, including for the global
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. As the IAEA confirms by
applying its most intrusive safeguards ever, Iran continues to fulfill its
nuclear obligations under the agreement. As long as that is the case, the
JCPOA effectively curtails Iran’s ability to develop nuclear weapons.
Iran’s role in the region and missile activities are clearly a matter of
concern, the latter indeed inconsistent with the UNSCR 2231. They
should be addressed separately and not at the expense of the JCPOA.
The JCPOA also underlines the crucial role of the IAEA in upholding
non-proliferation obligations under the NPT. It is high time for all States
which have not already done so to conclude an Additional Protocol.
All Parties to the NPT are entitled to develop and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. But safety and security are key. Sweden has extensive
cooperation and support to countries on both safety and security.
We are happy to see the awareness of the need of gender perspectives
and equal representation increasing within the NPT and the disarmament
and non-proliferation field in general. I hope that everyone wondering to
themselves what gender has to do with the NPT will join us at
Wednesday’s breakfast meeting, hosted by Australia, Canada, the
Netherlands and Sweden. 
Mr. Chair,
2020 marks the 50th anniversary of the NPT. We all have an obligation to
contribute to making the Review Conference a re-affirmation of the
vitality of this framework. There is no time to waste, the work must start
now, here at this PrepCom.
Thank you!