Mr. Chair,
As it is the first time I am taking the floor, I would like to congratulate you on the assumption of your important
function and thank you and your team for the thorough preparatory work.
As we begin this new review cycle, we find the NPT in a complex position. The failure of the 2015 Review
Conference demonstrated how hard it is to find common ground. This underlines the importance of this first
Session of the Preparatory Commission setting the stage in the best possible way for a review cycle which will
yield positive results.
Mr. Chair,
There have been some positive developments in the field of non-proliferation since 2015. For more than a year
now, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is being implemented constructively. This success adds to
the balance sheet in the field of non-proliferation. Most of the measures adopted by the 2010 Review Conference
in this area have been fulfilled or have seen progress. We also refer to the progress observed in the area of
nuclear security where we welcome inter alia the fact that the IAEA has taken over the results achieved through
the Nuclear Security Summits, even though we encourage a more comprehensive approach in nuclear security.
Nonetheless, a number of key concerns remain in this area, starting with the DPRK. This country has compounded
continuous violations of Security Council resolutions by accelerating its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes. The DPRK’s actions constitute a grave threat to peace and security. Switzerland condemns the
nuclear and missile tests by the DPRK and we urge the DPRK to re-join the NPT as a Non-Nuclear Weapon State.
We are convinced that a solution can only be found through diplomacy.
The DPRK crisis underlines that the continued challenge to the international norm of non-testing must also be met
by renewed efforts for the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). We would like
to recall that all nuclear-weapons States undertook to ratify the CTBT with expediency in the 2010 NPT action
plan. We also call upon all Annex 2 States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT at the earliest
possible date.
With regards to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, several advances have been achieved since the NPT Review
Conference of 2015. My delegation would like to highlight in particular the progress made in the continuous
strengthening of the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS), in which the Vienna declaration on Nuclear Safety
adopted in 2015 is now well anchored.
Mr. Chair,
In recent months, we have noted with great concern an increase in public statements and announcements running
counter to core principles and objectives of the NPT as the cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. Certain Nuclear Weapon States make reference to their nuclear capabilities in the context of current
tensions, while others seem to encourage the development of nuclear capacities by Non-Nuclear Weapon States
in response to regional challenges. For Switzerland, any ambiguous message about the fundamental principles
and objectives of the NPT is unacceptable.
5
Calling into question the unequivocal undertaking (by the nuclear-weapon States) to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals, or the principle of nuclear non-proliferation, which lie at the very the core of
this treaty, the NPT would be undermined. Indeed, almost 50 years after the adoption of the treaty, we must
remain vigilant and undertake all efforts to avoid a world where the number of States possessing nuclear weapons
would grow. Rather, we need a strong reassurance of the centrality, validity and the sustainability of the treaty, its
norms as well as the commitments of 1995, of 2000 and of 2010. This represents a solid acquis that remains valid
and relevant in its entirety and which must not be undermined but preserved and fully implemented. In this regard,
the 2010 Action Plan remains a key instrument to take forward the implementation of the commitments related to
three pillars of the NPT over the course of this cycle. Switzerland remains convinced of the importance to take
stock of what has been achieved, and to identify where efforts need to be stepped up, by setting ambitious but
realistic benchmarks to accelerate the Plan’s implementation.
In this context, we cannot but restate our concern that the implementation across the three pillars of the NPT has
advanced rather unequally. While we recognise that important efforts were made to reduce nuclear weapons, the
remaining challenges in the disarmament pillar remain very significant. Switzerland remains convinced that more
significant progress in the area of nuclear disarmament will be necessary to sustain the NPT and the credibility of
its “grand bargain”.
This is all the more essential since expectations of a world without nuclear weapons have increased after the 2010
acknowledgement in the NPT of the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapon.
Mr. Chair,
A new legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons will be adopted during the period of this review cycle.
It will be crucial that the prohibition treaty complements and strengthens the NPT as well as the CTBT, and in no
way undermines the international non-proliferation and disarmament regime. This key consideration has practical
implications when it comes to the provisions of the prohibition treaty, which Switzerland will keep highlighting in the
negotiations.
While views diverge on the “Ban”, all NPT States Parties have a shared interest in overcoming and not to sustain,
the current polarisation on this issue. Accordingly, we must prepare for a constructive and pragmatic coexistence
between the two treaties. Just as we must ensure that the ban complements and does not negatively affect the
NPT the “Ban” should also not serve as an excuse for inaction in the field of nuclear disarmament obligations and
other commitments under the NPT.
Mr. Chair,
We are committed to work with you and with the future Chairs - some of which have already been identified – to
preserve and strengthen the NPT as key instrument of international security. After the failure of 2015, a success in
2020 is much needed. We all share the responsibility to search for common ground, and reinvigorate the NPT;
new impetus can only come about if all parties engage in constructive dialogue.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.