Mr Chairman,
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is an essential tool for international security. Since its entry into
force more than 40 years ago, it has largely achieved what was expected of it in terms of nonproliferation.
The much feared large-scale proliferation of nuclear arms has not come to pass. There
are still many challenges, however, as numerous commitments have not been met, and progress has
remained uneven across the treaty's different pillars.
Mr Chairman,
Although the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference might be considered modest with
respect to the measures that it contains, it nevertheless sets out a list of concrete goals and
establishes a roadmap to reinforce implementation of the NPT. Along with the Final Documents of
1995 and 2000, the 64 actions and the practical steps for the Middle East adopted in 2010 represent
the NPT's latest acquis.
It will therefore be essential to maintain - or even reinforce -the momentum that has been created by
the adoption of the Action Plan. This Action Plan should not be viewed as an end in itself, but rather as
a means of achieving full implementation of NPT commitments. As such, the Action Plan offers the
possibility of consolidating the NPT's credibility. In addition, the Final Document adopted in 2010
introduced new paths to explore, including the humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament which
will be a priority for Switzerland in the years to come. The constructive spirit that prevailed in 2010
gives us comfort in the hope that more ambitious results can be achieved in the future.
While adoption of the 2010 Action Plan is to be welcomed, ensuring its full implementation is just as
crucial. As we enter this new review cycle, we should take initial stock of developments in this regard.
This will allow us to identify areas where more effort needs to be applied. To this end, Switzerland has
supported a study to monitor the implementation of the Action Plan, the results of which will be
presented at a side-event on 2 May. 
Mr Chairman,
Progress needs to be made on all aspects of the NPT. My delegation will return in greater depth to the
level of implementation of the various actions in the Action Plan during the thematic discussions. At
this stage, we see three major challenges in carrying out the provisions contained in the NPT.
First, we wish to recall that the nuclear disarmament obligation was an essential element of the
compromise that allowed for the adoption of the NPT. However, all the evidence suggests that
nuclear disarmament remains the poor relation out of the three pillars of the Treaty. Two decades
after the end of the Cold War, nuclear deterrence is still very firmly established in the security
doctrines of nuclear-weapon states. What is more, thousands of nuclear weapons remain ready
for engagement in only a few minutes, and all of the nuclear-weapon states are pursuing
programmes to modernise their nuclear arsenals.
The nuclear weapon states must significantly intensify their efforts to realize the disarmament goal
as set forth in the Treaty. This is essential to ensure its long-term viability. The continuing
deadlock affecting the UN's disarmament machinery complicates further progress in multilateral
disarmament and thus the achievement of this goal. For that reason, we call on all States to invest
fully in the efforts that are being made to overcome these obstacles.
Secondly, the various cases of nuclear proliferation that have been on the agendas of our
meetings for several years still do not seem to offer solid prospects for a solution. Switzerland
regrets this state of affairs, and calls on the States concerned to fully respect their obligations in
this regard. From our point of view, there is a link between progress on nuclear disarmament and
progress on non-proliferation. More significant progress on disarmament might help to create a
more favourable climate for broader acceptance of more binding safeguards.
My third and final point concerns the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Since 2010, we have
witnessed a major event: the nuclear accident at Fukushima. We feel that it is imperative that
greater attention be given to issues of nuclear safety in the future.
Switzerland therefore strongly encourages the States Parties to quickly and fully implement the
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety adopted by the IAEA in September 2011. Switzerland is
nonetheless convinced that, eventually, more binding commitments will have to be made in the
area of nuclear safety.
Thank you for your attention 