
Mr. President, 
May I first say, on behalf of the Swiss delegation, how pleased we are to see you chairing this Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We are fortunate to be working with so eminent a representative of Algeria. I would also like to take this opportunity to assure you of the support and cooperation of my delegation in the fulfilment of your functions. 
Mr. President, 
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are two issues crucial to international security. As long as there is disparity in the world nuclear order, and until all danger of further proliferation - horizontal or vertical - has been removed, the international community must spare no effort in this field. 
For this purpose, the NPT remains the main tool. The decisions taken at the Review and Extension Conference, in 1995, should make it possible to strengthen the role of this instrument. 
In accordance with Article Vlll of the Treaty, and considering the four documents adopted by the Review and Extension Conference in 1995, the task of our Conference is to review the workings of the NPT with a view to ensuring that the objectives stated in the preamble and the provisions of the Treaty itself are being realised. We must evaluate the results of these last five years, and identify the fields in which further progress needs to be made, and the tools required for this purpose. The Conference should also expressly look for ways of improving the application of the Treaty and ensuring universal support for it. This review should enable us to draw up a balance sheet, identify deficiencies, and agree on an action programme to ensure compliance with and implementation of the NPT and all the decisions taken in 1995. 
Mr. President, 
To analyse developments since 1995, I would like to begin by noting a number of positive developments: 
1. The Conference on Disarmament has been successful in concluding negotiations or a Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), as postulated in the action programme contained in the Principles and Objectives" of the 1995 NPT Conference. 
2. Efforts towards nuclear disarmament have continued, albeit with some difficulty. France and the United Kingdom in particular have reduced their nuclear arsenals, decided not to modemise them, stopped production of fissile materials for military purposes, and ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. The United States and the Russian Federation have also made certain reductions, particularly in the framework of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties, and in this respect we welcome the recent ratification of START II by Russia and the announcement of renewed negotiations on START III. Although we regard these developments as very important, we do not lose sight of the tact that considerable stocks remain, the existence of which is difficult to justify today in terms of national security. 
3. Further nuclear-weapon-free zones have been established, in South-East Asia and in Africa. There also seems to be progress in creating a similar zone in Central Asia. 
4. The model for an Additional Protocol to the Safeguards Agreements has been adopted within the international Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). This strengthens the Agency's capacity to detect undeclared nuclear activities. Since 1995, the Agency has also signed full-scope safeguards agreements with a further 28 States. 
However, this positive picture is overshadowed by some less welcome developments: 
1. 1. The objective of complete disarmament, stipulated in Article VI, remains as remote as in 1995. The military significance of nuclear weapons remains unchanged, even though their political importance has perhaps diminished and such weapons are beginning to be seen not only as an asset, but also as a burden Nuclear deterrence continues to be part of defence doctrine, and new arguments for maintaining nuclear arsenals have been put forward. 
2. The new treaties negotiated in recent years have not yet come into force, because they have not been ratified by some States. The treaties in question are, on the multilateral level, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and, on the bilateral level-until very recently-START II. 
3. The efforts of the Geneva Conference on Disarmament in the area of nuclear arms control have got bogged down. The Conference has not been able to begin negotiations on a convention banning the production of fissile material, which was part of the action programme recommended by the 1995 NPT Conference. The Conference on Disarmament has also failed to initiate negotiations on security assurances. 
4. Nuclear tests in South Asia have come as a brutal reminder that regional instabilities can become a source of nuclear proliferation. Hence the urgency of tackling the problem of the NPT's lack of universality Achieving universality now seems more difficult than it was five years ago. It will therefore be necessary to examine very carefully how non-members in possession of nuclear weapons could be inclttded in a global system of nuclear non-proliferation. 
5. Doubts remain as to whether Iraq and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea are fully complying with the Treaty. In the past, these two States have not fully complied with the obligations undertaken by virtue of their safeguards agreements with the IAEA. 
Mr. President, 
This generally discouraging summary leads us to the three following conclusions: 
1. We find an imbalance between the lack of progress made in realizing the objective mentioned in Article Vl and implementation of other aspects of the Treaty, in particular articles II and III. For this reason, Switzerland continues to defend the point of view that the decision to extend taken in 1995 must not mean an indefinite extension of the status quo, particularly as regards the prerogatives of the nuclear-weapon States. It would be wrong to believe that, after the indefinite extension of the NPT, implementation of its provisions as a whole, in particular Article Vl, is no longer relevant. More than ever, then, our conference must address the issue of how to re-establish a balance between disarmament and non-proliferation. 
2. This imbalance also jeopardises the two compromises which have made it possible to conclude, and later to extend, the NPT. The fact is that the NPT is based on a reciprocal commitment: a renunciation of nuclear weapons on the part of the vast majority of States Parties, which nevertheless retain the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in return for a commitment on the part of States in possession of nuclear weapons to pursue negotiations with a view to nuclear disarmament. Tin 1995, a second compromise was added to this initial reciprocal commitment: the extension of the NPT for an unspecified period in return for the adoption of the "Principles and Objectives", the establishment of a strengthened review process, and a resolution on the Middle East. These t995 decisions are part of a package which can no longer be undone.
3. The lack of progress since 1995 also means that the strengthened review process has not been as effective as it was hoped. The Preparatory Committee has been unable to achieve its main objective, which was to draw up concrete recommendations regarding the Cull application and universality of the Treaty. In our opinion, it is therefore necessary to revitalize the strengthened review process and maybe reconsider the workings of this Preparatory Committee, so that it is really in a position to develop mechanisms to make the States Parties concerned adopt a more responsible attitude and to bring about effective implementation of the Treaty. Review of the review process is therefore, quite rightly, an important additional task of our Conference. 
Mr. President, 
The work of this Conference should result in texts which look both to the past and to the future. This end can be achieved if the Review Conference adopts two types of documents: 
Firstly, a document containing a review of the application of the Treaty and the "Principles and Objectives" since the 1995 Conference. Experience having shown that consensus on all parts of a document of this kind is not always possible, we would be open to other formulae which would reflect the results of the review. 
Secondly, a new package of reaffirmed principles and updated and supplemented objectives, which should be adopted by consensus and would supplement the 1995 document. 
Indeed, the starting point for a revitalization of the review process should be a reaffirmation of the fundamental compromise I have just referred to, i.e. the link between disarmament and non-proliferation and the link between the extension of the NPT and the adoption of the other documents of the 1995 Conference. 
The next step would be to establish new objectives, including measures to redress the negative developments that have occurred since 1995. These additional objectives could take the for n of a new "action plan ", with a view to measuring, on an on-going basis, the progress made at sessions of the Preparatory Committee and at review conferences. 
A new action plan of this kind should include the following points (the Swiss delegation will submit a working document to this effect): 
1. Confidence-building measures and information to increase the transparency of efforts undertaken to implement the "Principles and Objectives". Nuclear-weapon States in particular should systematically inform all parties to the NPT of the progress they have made and the difficulties they have encountered in their efforts to make reductions, and of changes to their nuclear arsenals. Such transparency would help to re-establish confidence in the viability of the non-proliferation and multilateral approaches to disarmament. 
2. The Conference should encourage further systematic reductions in nuclear weapons, on the basis of Article Vl, with a view to their complete elimination. Given the size of their arsenals, the United States and the Russian Federation have a special responsibility. Further reductions by these two States would also serve to weaken the legitimacy of the arsenals held by States which are not parties to the NPT. Unilateral reductions would be a useful adjunct to bilateral efforts.
3. Reductions in nuclear arsenals should include the elimination of warheads and the placing of fissile materials under IAEA safeguards.
4. Tactical (sub-strategic) nuclear weapons should be included in formal disarmament processes.
5. While waiting for the CTBT to come into force, all the parties to this Treaty should undertake to comply with a moratorium on nuclear testing. Sub-critical laboratory tests conducted for the purpose of developing new weapons should be recognized as incompatible with the preamble of the CTBT.
6. Negotiations to conclude a treatv banning the production of fissile material for explosive purposes should be initiated by the CD without further delay. While waiting for a treaty of this kind, all States should also adopt transparency measures and respect a moratorium in this field. 
7. The Conference on Disarmament should intensify its efforts in the area of security assurances.
8. States which are party to the NET should henceforth show a more intense concern for regional aspects of non-proliferation. The nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan, and the situation in such regions as the Middle East, highlight the close relationship between regional instability and the danger of nuclear proliferation. 
Mr. President, 
An action plan of this kind would seem at this stage to be a realistic method for us to make progress towards nuclear disarmament. If all States do all they can to implement this plan in the next few years, there will be a good chance of consolidating the role of the NPT as the main pillar of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, and of preventing certain States train losing interest in the NPT on the grounds that it no longer takes due account of their security interests. 
Thank you, Mr. President. 
 
