Mr Chairman.
On behalf of my delegation, I would first of all like to congratulate you on your election to chair our
work and to assure you of our full support. We are gathered here in Geneva, the capital of
humanitarian values and the traditional home of disarmament, where issues relating to global peace
and stab~lity are discussed daily. The fact that progress in this area has been slow underlines the
significance of these issues are.
Mr Chairman,
The NPT is an essential instrument to strengthen global peace and stability. Since its entry into force
more than forty years ago, this treaty has largely accomplished what was expected from it in terms of
non-proliferation. Thus, it has greatly contributed to protecting humanity from the devastating effects
any use of nuclear weapons would have had.
Nevertheless, the NPT is facing numerous challenges. Indeed, many commitments have been only
partially fulfilled, and progress across the different NPT pillars remains highly unequal. This imbalance
is especially striking with respect to the implementation of the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review
Conference.
Overall, Switzerland sees four major challenges we are currently facing. 
1. The first challenge concerns slow progress in nuclear disarmament. This fact was demonstrated
by the presentation given here in Geneva last March by three independent civil society actors that
analysed the progress made in implementing the 2010 Action Plan. The general conclusion is that
while real progress in the areas of non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy can be
reported, there has been practically no progress whatever in the area of nuclear disarmament.
This is all the more worrisome because we are one year away from the 3rd Session of the
Preparatory Committee, during which the nuclear-weapon States will have to report on their
disarmament efforts. If more tangible results are not achieved by then, the relevance of the 2010
Action Plan and the credibility of the NPT will face a serious challenge.
Switzerland therefore calls on all nuclear-weapon States, which bear the primary responsibility for
fulfilling disarmament obligations, to rapidly and substantially fulfil these obligations and to
participate constructively in all efforts in this regard.
Among such efforts, I would especially like to emphasise the very positive and encouraging Oslo
Conference last March on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. Thls conference is
perfectly consistent with the spirit of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference. Indeed,
the 2010 outcome had introduced the humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament as a new
avenue to be explored to facilitate the implementation of Article VI of the NPT. It therefore seems
crucial to us that all States Parties to the NPT engage in the discussion of this dimension. My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement that will subsequently be made on this issue by
South Africa on behalf of a group of States.
It also seems just as important to us that all States Parties be actively involved in the open-ended
working group on nuclear disarmament established by resolution AlRESl67156. The slow pace of
nuclear disarmament and the persistent deadlock in the disarmament machinery fully justify
launching such a working group, which is completely in line with the logic of Article VI of the NPT.
F~nally, the h~gh-level meeting of the General Assembly will be a valuable opportunity for States
Parties to have their political leaders reaffirm their commitment to nuclear disarmament.
2. The second challenge involves the growing tensions caused by proliferation issues. These
underscore the importance of both a robust and universal non-proliferation regime. Switzerland
calls upon Iran to abide by its international obligations and on the DPRK to return to the nonproliferation
regime of the NPT. We emphasize that only negotiations can lead to a long- term and
satisfactory solution of these issues.
The Additional Protocol, which Switzerland wishes to see widely adopted, is an important
component to make the safeguards system more robust. For Switzerland, the combination of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and an Additional Protocol ought to become the
standard for safeguards. Therefore, Switzerland supports the IAEA's ongoing efforts to establish a
safeguards system that is less mechanistic and takes more into account the particularities of each 
country without losing its effectiveness. In other words, the IAEA has to focus its efforts as I
efficiently as possible where they are really needed. Switzerland has launched various initiatives
to support the IAEA in this regard and encourages all States Parties to support the Agency's
conceptual work.
3. The third challenge concerns the Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction. Switzerland deeply regrets that
despite the facilitator's impressive efforts, this conference has still not been held. Switzerland
believes that the pretexts given to delay the launch of a process leading to such a zone do not
match the signif~cance of the challenge. If we still needed to be convinced of the importance of
such a zone for the region, I would limit myself to recalling the current concerns about a possible
use of chemical weapons in Syria. Switzerland therefore calls on those most concerned, i.e. the
States of the region, to take full ownership of the process that began in 2010 and to enter into a
constructive dialogue with one another. It also calls on the three co-sponsors of the 1995
Resolution to carry out their role with greater determination.
4. The fourth and last point concerns the consequences of the Fukushima accident. This disaster
confirms the necessity of a policy that makes nuclear safety an absolute requirement. Switzerland
has therefore been committed to advancing and maintaining the highest level of nuclear safety
both at the national and global level. Thus, we called for more binding commitments during the
negotiation on the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety in September 201 1. Switzerland belleves
that strengthening the peer review system, particularly through more regular inspections, may
prove useful for reducing the likelihood of another Fukushima-type scenario.
Switzerland strongly encourages all States Parties to rapidly and comprehensively implement the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and calls on those that have not yet done so, to implement
the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
Mr Chairman,
Let me conclude by noting that halfway through the process leading up to the 2015 Review
Conference, the areas where it will be necessary to make greater efforts have been clearly identlf~ed.
They are outlined in the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference, whose implementation
is everyone's responsibility. To this effect, Switzerland has submitted its report on the implementation
of the Action Plan and encourages all States Parties to do the same. Lastly, my country calls on all
States Parties to spare no effort to meet the challenges ahead and to overcome the different positions
to ensure that the 2015 Review Conference will be a success.
Thank you for your attention.