Mr Chairman,
I would like to begin by expressing on behalf of my delegation our congratulation to you on your assumption of this third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2005 NPT Review Conference. I can assure you of my delegation's full co-operation and support your Chairmanship.
Mr Chairman,
Since the second Session of the Preparatory Committee which was held in Geneva in 2003, there have been a number of developments in the field of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. Some of these developments are positive, others are a cause of concern.
1.	Libya - whose nuclear weapons programme was far more advanced than is generally supposed - has decided to renounce the development of such weapons. Switzerland is pleased with this decision, which was given concrete form when Tripoli ratified the CTBT and signed an Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA.
2.	Recent investigations in Iraq have confirmed the IAEA's conclusions about the absence of a nuclear weapons programme in that country,
3.	However, the international efforts to find a solution to the nuclear question in the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea have not yet produced any results.
4.	Although my country was pleased that Iran has suspended its nuclear enrichment programme and signed an Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, questions about several aspects of the Iranian nuclear programme remain unanswered. My government hopes that these questions will be clarified as soon as possible.
5.	A further cause of concern was the discovery, thanks to the IAEA's numerous verification activities in Iran and in Libya and following Ihe admissions of the Pakistani scientist Abdul Qadir Khan, of an extremely dangerous black market for nuclear technology.
6. Finally, Switzerland regrets the decision by the United States' Congress to abrogate the 1993 law blocking the allocation of scientific research funds in the area of low-yield nuclear weapons as well as the allocation of funds to re-activate nuclear weapon test sites. However, the conclusion of the SORT Treaty on arms control between the US and Russia is a positive development.
Mr Chairman,
These developments illustrate three of the serious problems with which the NPT is confronted: its lack of influence on the activities of countries which have nuclear weapons but are not Parties to the NPT, the lack of will by a number of States Parties to the NPT to fully meet their obligations as set out in the Treaty and the difficulty to act during serious proliferation crises. In addition, we should also consider the new dimension of the threat of terrorism.
This state of affairs underlines the need to strengthen multi-lateral cooperation in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. To this end, Switzerland proposes to take the following specific measures to advance the debate and to strengthen the goals of the NPT.
1. First and foremost, efforts to universalise the NPT must continue. As a whole they will be the most effective bulwark against fears of insecurity associated for some with the incomplete process of nuclear disarmament and for others with nuclear proliferation. On the one hand, the discriminatory nature of the Treaty itself must be ended by completing the nuclear disarmament. On the other hand, pressure needs to be put on Non-States Parties to ratify the Treaty. In this specific context, Nuclear Weapons States Parties to the NPT must assume a collective responsibility in order to prevent any weakening of the NPT. They must do so either by exerting greater influence on Non-States Parties to agree to co-operate with the IAEA in all their nuclear activities or by discontinuing their nuclear co-operation with these States.
2.	Specific measures have recently been proposed to strengthen the IAEA Switzerland supports the ratification by all States Parties to the NPT of an Additional Protocol to their Safeguards Agreements with the IAEA. F:or Switzerland, the ratification of the Additional Protocol should be completed in the course of this year. We also welcome the general thrust of President Bush's statement of 11 February and we encourage this session to give careful consideration to the latest proposals by the Director general of the IAEA, Mr El Baradei.
3.	The widening nuclear proliferation is not unconnected with the fact that Nuclear Weapons States Parties to the NPT have still not entirely fulfilled their promises of nuclear disarmament in compliance with Art.VI of the NPT. In this matter, Switzerland wishes to stress that the "Principles and Objectives" adopted in 1995 and the "Thirteen Steps" adopted in 2000 form an indivisible whole that must not be weakened.
4.	Switzerland points out that the final document of the NPT Review Conference of 2000 recognised the legitimacy of legally binding security assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and that the Conference called for recommendations to be made on this matter for the 2005 Review Conference. In this context, Switzerland is in favour of an urgent recommendation giving States Parties a mandate to negotiate a new international instrument.
5.	For my country the right of peaceful use of nuclear energy is one of the basic pillars of the NPT according to Art. IV. My government therefore cannot support proposals for a general ban on exports of certain technologies to countries that do not already have this technology. However, we find it appropriate that the criminalisation of illegal activities in the area of nuclear technology should be integrated into the national legislations of all States Parties.
6.	Recent developments have revealed the institutional weaknesses of the strengthened process of review conferences. Switzerland therefore supports initiatives to strengthen the verification of the NPT. to organ se
annual conferences of States Parties and to further develop the instrument of declarations.
7. Finally, although Switzerland believes that the main efforts to achieve nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament should be made through the negotiation and the adoption of legally binding multilateral instruments, it does not wish to exclude other complementary initiatives. To this end Switzerland has joined the G-8 Global Partnership Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and it also collaborates with the Proliferation Security Initiative.
Mr Chairman,
The mandate of this session is to adopt substantial recommendations for the
2005 Review Conference. Its success will depend on our ability to reach
agreement on measures designed to satisfy the security needs of all.
Mr Chairman, thank you for your attention.