Mr. President,
I am pleased to congratulate you on your election as president of this session, and I am fully confident that your experience and practical skills will lead this meeting to success. I would like to assure you also of our support to the success of your work. My delegation joins the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf of Non-aligned Movement and the statement of the Arab Group.
Mr. President,
The nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the comer stone of the multilateral international system in the area of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, faces unprecedented challenges due to the lack of the balanced treatment of its two main pillars, namely nuclear disarmament and prevention of nuclear non-proliferation, and also because of the use of double standards by some countries regarding Israel, which possesses advanced military nuclear capabilities outside the framework of any international control.
The indefinite extension of the treaty in 1995 was part of an agreement containing the resolution on the Middle East. The Final Document of the NPT Review Conference in 2000 stressed that this resolution remains in effect till its goals and objectives are achieved.
While Syria and the Arab States made several initiatives to establish a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East, the latest of which was submitted to the Security Council in 2003, in this regard the Arab Summit held in Damascus in March 2008 has reiterated its commitment to achieve these objectives, Israel persists in its refusal to accede to the Treaty on the non-proliferation nuclear weapons, also continuous its refusal to place all its nuclear facilities under the comprehensive safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency of non-proliferation and to peace and security regionally and internationally.
Israel's attempt to link the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East with the achievement of peace in the region is an evasion of achieving these two goals, namely the nuclear free zone and the peace. Israel refuses to achieve just and comprehensive peace as it is clear of its non-compliance with all resolutions of the international legitimacy, while it
impeded the establishment of the zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East.
Mr. President,
Syria reaffirms its continual commitment to its international obligations under the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; and firmly believes that this Treaty is the international reference to the right of States Parties to obtain nuclear energy for use in various peaceful applications.
Mr. President,
Now, and after the Nuclear Non-Proliferation treaty entered its Fourth decade, we hope that our meeting will be able to come out with clear answers to the following questions:
-Why the international community has not been able to achieve the universality of the Treaty after Forth decades of international meetings and conferences, and to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East?
-Why one of the main objectives of the Treaty, the nuclear disarmament, was not achieved yet?
-Do nuclear arsenals provide security to States that posses them? Or do they just undermine the international peace and security?
Syria hopes that this meeting will be able to answer those questions, because we believe that the respect of the provisions of the Treaty and at the existence of international will to apply them, are conducive to the achievements of these goals
Thank You