PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
Please check auainst delivery
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
351 EAST 52ND STREET- NEW YORK, NY 10022
TEL (212) 754-2230 FAX (212) 688-3029
Statement
by
His Excellency Mr. Chayapan Bamrungphong
Ambassador and Deputy Permanent Representative,
Charge d' Affaires a.i.
of the Kingdom of Thailand to the United Nations
at the General Debate of the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 30 April 2015 
Madam President,
At the outset, allow me the honour to congratulate you on your election as
President of the 2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My sincere congratulations
also go to the other esteemed members of the Bureau. My delegation lends its
full cooperation and support to you, Madam President, in steering the important
work we have before us in the days and weeks ahead.
Thailand associates itself with the statement delivered by the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Nan-Aligned
Movement (NAM), as well as the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Madam President,
Allow me to share Thailand's views on a fPw points of particular
importance for my delegation:
A world free of nuclear weapons is not a pipe dream. It is a clear and
achievable goal. Some view current global insecurities facing the international
community as proof that progress on this front will continue to elude us. We
believe the exact opposite. The current challenges we face underline that now,
more than ever, we need to find the inspiration to overcome our differences. We
need to secure a safer world for generations to come.
Thailand believes that the NPT remains the cornerstone of international
efforts on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We also view that, as
States Parties to the NPT, we have a legal responsibility to fulfill our obligations
under Article V1 on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control.
Forty-five years have passed since the NPT's entry into force. These
obligations remains largely unfulfilled. For Thailand. no one is to blame but
everyotze is resporrsible. Nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states
alike must have the courage to be creative, flexible and to move the mountain
fonvard in a constructive manner. 
This year marks 70 years since the first nuclear weapons devastated
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Coupled with the three Humanitarian Conferences in
Oslo, Nayarit and Vienna, there is even more reason and momentum to take clear
steps in the right direction in order to make progress now.
For Thailand, we saw a window of opportunity to contribute what we
could to this momentum. We saw a need to support firrther focused discussion
on the issue. For us, living up to our obligations under Article VI meant making
it possible to explore how to take the discussion on concrete proposals on a legal
instrument forward. How do we address the legal deficit on the issue of nuclear
weapons? How do we forge ahead with further developments in international
law? Last month, we co-hosted with the International Law and Policy Institute
of Norway, a Regional Roundtable on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons and the Prospects for a Ban Treaty in Bangkok. It was the third such
roundtable in our region. We hope that the recommendations coming out of that
discussion can be helpful in formulating further concrete actions aimed at
nuclear disarmament. We hope that it would contribute, along with the many
other laudable initiatives, to jump-starting a diplomatic process on the issue.
Thailand also attaches importance to promoting public awareness on the
issue, especially among the younger generation. Last year, the Foreign Ministry
held a reception in Bangkok to commemorate the first ever International Day for
the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, at which youth participated in the
public speaking contest and shared their views on "A Wor-ld Free of Nuclear
Weapons ". We are determined to continue to engage the public on this issue, as
we view this is crucial to advance the goals of the Treaty in support of achieving
a world free of nuclear weapons.
2. Nuclear Weapons Free Zortes (NWFZs)
Thailand is the depository state of the Bangkok Treaty that established the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ). We view all zones to
be important confidence building measures which have a unique role to play, not
only in efforts on disarmament but also in efforts on non-proliferation.
Therefore, Thailand strongly supports the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones in all other regions. We continue to be disappointed by the failure to
convene the Conference to discuss the establishment of such a zone in the
Middle East prior to this Review Conference. Thailand calls upon all relevant
parties to continue to work together constructively, and in good faith, in order to
achieve tangible progress on this matter. 
3. Nott-Proliferation
Thailand is determined to continue to enhance its implementation of the
relevant international frameworks aimed at countering the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices, as stipulated in Article I and I1
of the Treaty. Thailand reaffirms its commitment to hlfill the obligations set
forth in the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolution 1540. In
addition, Thailand also participates actively in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Proliferation Security Initiative, and the Nuclear Security
Summit, for which we hosted two Sherpa meetings to prepare for the 20 14 and
2016 NSS. At the NSS in the Hague last year, the Special Envoy of the Thai
Prime Minister underlined the importance of capacity building, the critical role
of the lAEA in this regard, as well as the need to raise awareness and engage all
stakeholders in strengthening nuclear security and non-proliferation efforts.
Thailand encourages more cooperation among NPT States Parties to enhance
capacity in this area. This can be done by exchanging of best practices, sharing
lessons learned, and extending assistance to requesting countries.
4. Pencef~rrl Uses of N~rrclenr Energy
Thailand believes that it is in the interest of all States Parties to protect the
inalienable right to develop and use nuclear energy in a safe, secure and peaceful
manner, as stipulated in Article 1V of the Treaty. For Thailand, we value and
benefit from IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme, and will continue to
cooperate closely with the IAEA to promote and utilise nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes.
Thailand, as a member of ASEAN, affirms our serious commitment to
ensure that high standards of safeguards and safety measures are adhered to in
the peacehl use of nuclear energy. The ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies
on Atomic Energy (ASEANTOM) was established in 2013 to facilitate the
sharing of best practices, exchange of views and information on safety, security,
and safeguards in the use of nuclear energy for the benefit of the people in our
region. We hosted the first and second formal meetings of the ASEANTOM
and look fonvard to expanding cooperation between ASEANTOM: the lAEA
and other similar bodies. 
Madam President,
In closing, I wish to reaffirm my delegation's commitment to working with
all delegations in order to reach a comprehensive and balanced outcome
document. Thailand will approach the important work that lies ahead of us with
a spirit of inspiration, ambition, flexibility, understanding and a real appreciation
of our shared responsibility for our common human heritage and future.
Whether within the context of the NPT Review Conference, the First Committee
of the UNGA, the Disarmament Commission, the Security Council for which we
are running for a non-permanent seat for the term 20 17-20 18, we hope to do our
part in finding the common space for different views to reconcile and move
forward.
Thank you, Madam President. 