Mr. Chairman,
My delegation congratulates you upon your election as Chairman of the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the States Parties to the NPT. With your able guidance and leadership, I am confident that the outcome of this PrepCom meeting will contribute positively towards the Review Conference, and I assure you of our full cooperation. My delegation also associates itself with the statement made by the distinguished Ambassador of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
The spread of weapons of mass destruction poses a great challenge to humanity, whether in this generation or the next. Our ultimate goal must be to work towards a world free of nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction. It is therefore incumbent upon the international community to display a common and shared responsibility in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The failure of the 2005 Review Conference in producing a final document should serve as a reminder for all of us that we must do better in our future course. Thailand strongly supports the principle of multilateralism. We therefore believe that the NPT lies at the cornerstone of global security architecture. In this spirit, we urge all Member States of the NPT to engage actively in our common endeavor to reach early consensus on relevant procedural issues. This will enable us to concentrate fully on the substantive review of implementation of the Treaty itself.
On our part, Thailand reaffirms its commitments to the three mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT, namely disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We believe the effective implementation of Article VI of the NPT should continue to be promoted. Indeed, the commitments of non-nuclear weapon states to the non-proliferation regime should be proportionately matched by those of nuclear weapon states in addressing general and complete nuclear disarmament. In this regard, my delegation reaffirms the importance of implementing the 13 practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament as adopted at the 2000 Review Conference. We are also prepared to consider additional steps as may be deemed necessary.
In promoting the nuclear non-proliferation regime, Thailand expresses full support to the work of the IAEA as the sole international authority on the questions of safeguards and verification. We need to enhance the capability of the Agency through diplomatic, political and financial means to enable it to respond adequately to current and future proliferation challenges. We also believe that education is the essential tool to raise public awareness on the danger of WMDs. In this regard, we support the idea of promoting non-proliferation and disarmament through education as stated in the UNGA resolution 61/73.
Turning now to the regional front, Thailand believes that diplomatic efforts need to be strengthened to create a climate of trust and confidence. On an issue of our immediate concern, Thailand welcomes the progress of the Six Party Talks and the eventual denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. While recognizing that more needs to be done, we urge the DPRK and all parties concerned to intensify their efforts in this matter with a view to achieving an environment of stability and security in the Asia Pacific region.
It should be noted that the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones has contributed significantly to the effectiveness of the NPT. Thailand welcomes the recent establishment of the Central Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone. We also support the establishment of a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East. As such, we call upon all relevant parties to engage with one another in a spirit of true partnership in order to realize this important goal.
Within our own region, we have just observed the 10th Anniversary of the Treaty on Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone or SEANWFZ in 2007. This occasion certainly provided impetus for future directions in this regard. We fully support the Plan of Action endorsed by the SEANWFZ Commission in order to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty in the next five years. We hope that nuclear weapon states will seriously consider signing the Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty. China's readiness to do so is most encouraging, and we do hope that the other nuclear weapon states would do the same in due course. It should be stressed that non first use against non nuclear weapon states is an essential building block in the non-proliferation regime.
Additionally, my delegation fully subscribes to the inalienable right of States to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in compliance with Article IV as well as other relevant provisions of the NPT. We recognize the renewed global interest in nuclear power as a new alternative source of energy, particularly in the Asian region. Thailand believes that nuclear safety is an essential element to ensure public confidence and success of the nuclear power development programme. As the incoming Chair of ASEAN, Thailand is hosting the ASEAN Plus Three Forum on Nuclear Energy Safety in Bangkok in June with a view to enhancing synergy on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in our region, particularly on the aspects of technology transfer and capacity building.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me close by reiterating that the NPT constitutes a vital cornerstone for the preservation of international peace and security. We must therefore reenergize our constructive engagement and build the energy, momentum and, most of all, the critical will to make this PrepCom meeting a successful path towards the 2010 Review Conference. Such an achievement would be the fruits of our collective work, and Thailand stands ready to support and facilitate any relevant efforts in this process.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.