PERMANENT MISSION OF THAJLAND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
IN VIENNA
COTTAGEGASSE 48,1180, VlENNA
TEL (+43 1) 478 3335 FAX (+43 1) 478 2907
Statement
Mrs. Siriporn Chaimongkol
Director for Peace, Security and Disarmament
Department of International Organizations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
before the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
30 April-11 May 2012
United Nations, Vienna
Please check against delivery 
Statement by Ms. Skipom d'bahoaagk01,
Head of Delegation of Thdand,
i&e 60%" the 20 15 Review Conference
of the Pafires to the Treakgr on the Nan-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
30 April - l l May 20 12, Viema
Mr. Chairman,
1. At the outset, I would like to join other delegations in congratulating you, on your
assumption as the Chair of the First session of the Preparatory Committee of the 201 5
NPT Review Conference. My congratulatlons also go to other members of the Bureau. 1
believe that under your able leadership and guidance, this meeting will certainly
produce useful discussions and a successful conclusion. I assure you of the full support
of my delegation.
2. Thailand also wishes to associate itself with the statement made by the
distinguished delegate of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (IMAM)
States Parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman;
3. For more than four decades since its entry into force in 1970, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of international
peace and security. The adoption of the Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference by consensus not only represents a successful negotiation, but also reflects
the strong political will of all NPT States Parties to achieve concrete results which
includes the 64-point action plan. This has been regarded as constructive and successful
progress in the area of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
4. It cannot be denied that a divergence of views remains on several issues and such
divergences should be further addressed at this cycle of the Review Conference in order
to strengthen the NPT. It is also very important to stress the universality of the Treaty -
a crucial aspect that would allow our efforts to effectively progress towards the
achievement of the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chaiman,
5. For such a goal to be achievable, all three pillars of the NPT, nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, must be equally
addressed in a balanced manner. In this regard, strong political leadership and
international cooperation are essential for the pursuance of such efforts. Thus, the 20 10
Review Conference action plans on all three issues must be seriously and fully
implemented by nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapons States alike. 
-2- P
6. In "&is regard, Thailand welcomes any concrete measures undertaken by relevant
parties on these issues, which would not just symbolise the effort% but also produce
tangible results towards a nuclear-weapon-free world. We look forward to the
commencement of negotiations on a treaty bshnsning the production of fissile material, as
well as a Nuclear Weapon Convention, to be held in an inclusive manner. We also
support unequivocal and legally binding security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States, which would help strengthen the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
regime
Mr. Ghaiman,
7. To achieve practical outcomes in a11 of the three pillars of the NPT, global efforts
must be further enhanced by regional efforts. As a State Party to the Treaty on the South
East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SE Z), Thailand supports "the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different regions, including the Middle
East. In this regard, Thailand urges all parties to fully support the convening this year of
the conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone 6pee of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction.
8. Cooperation amongst different Zs, as well as agreements between Zs
and nuclear-weapon States, will enh effectiveness of the agreements in serving
easures at the regional, as well as the global levels. As a State
Treaty, Thailand welcomes progress made by the States Parties
and the nuclear-weapon States towards the signing of the Protocol to the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
9. It is the inalienable right of States Parties to develop and use nuclear energy in a
safe, secure and peaceful manner. Thailand attaches great importance to nuclear safety,
security and safeguards at the national, regional and international levels. At the regional
level, we proposed the idea of establishing a network amongst nuclear regulatory bodies
within the Southeast Asian region to provide a framework for the issues of safety,
security and safeguards, based on the IAEA standards and practices. The proposal has
been welcomed by ASEAN Leaders at the 2Oth ASEAN Summit, and we will continue
to further discuss this issue with our ASEAN colleagues.
Mr. Chairman,
10. Thailand is fully committed to the 20 10 Review Conference action plans in order
to contribute to the strengthening of the three pillars of the NPT. Nly delegation looks
forward to working closely with you and other delegations to produce a solid and
achievable outcome for this new review cycle of the NPT for the advancement towards
the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
Thank you, Mr. Ghairma1.7. 