1
NPT 2. PREPATORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL STATEMENT OF TURKEY
23 APRIL 2018
Mr Chairman,
I congratulate you on your assumption of the chairmanship of the second session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. I assure you of our support
and cooperation in discharging your duties.
Turkey aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the NPDI.
I will read out an abridged version of my speech. The full text will be posted electronically.
We reaffirm the importance of the NPT as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation
regime and the essential foundation of the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. As a country that is
party to all major international non-proliferation instruments and regimes, Turkey remains
committed to the full implementation and further strengthening of the Treaty with its three
pillars.
At the mid-point of this review cycle, our priority is to uphold NPT as a major instrument for
reinforcing international peace, security and stability and to promote its universalization. We
are committed to our mandate to strengthen disarmament, non-proliferation and promote
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the 2010
Action Plan identified the main goals in these three pillars.
Mr Chairman,
Turkey supports systematic, progressive, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament and
encourages all states that possess nuclear weapons to take further steps in this direction. The
primary responsibility rests with the Nuclear Weapon States.
It is essential to preserve the progress made during the last 30 years and to advance them
further. Today we find ourselves in a very complex and volatile security environment. This
requires more than ever that all States Parties to act in restraint and opt for solutions through
diplomacy and negotiations.
We welcome the completion of reductions by the United States and the Russian Federation
under the New START treaty. We hope further disarmament and arms control measures will
be brought to life, after the New START Treaty expires in 2021.
We would like to reiterate our call to the states outside the NPT regime to accede to the
Treaty without conditions as non-nuclear-weapon States.
We remain committed to a world without nuclear weapons. In our opinion this can not be
achieved without taking the reality of the international security environment into
consideration. Our approach is focused on incremental steps that deliver concrete results
contributing to disarmament. Last years have witnessed sharpened differences of opinion,
coupled with unproductive polarization. On our part, we will continue working towards the 
2
implementation of the 2010 NPT Action Plan. Sanctity of the NPT and current NPT Review
Cycle should not be undermined by efforts undertaken elsewhere.
Mr Chairman,
The cessation of all nuclear weapon tests constitutes an important step towards both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, we would like to stress the centrality of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)). We call upon all States to uphold and maintain
moratoria on nuclear weapon test explosions and any other nuclear explosions. Despite all the
progress achieved at the political and technical levels, we regret the fact that twenty one years
after its opening for signature, CTBT has yet to enter into force.
We once again encourage all States, in particular to the remaining Annex II States whose
ratifications are required for the entry into force of the Treaty, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible.
Another essential step will be the commencement of negotiations of a non-discriminatory,
multilateral and verifiable treaty to ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices at the Conference of Disarmament (CD). This will again
serve both disarmament and non-proliferation purposes. We welcome the work of the High
Level Expert Preparatory Group in this regard.
CD needs to be revitalized so that it can assume substantive work and start negotiating as it
has been mandated. We welcome all efforts to bring the CD back to work and recent decision
to establish subsidiary bodies to explore common ground. It is Turkey’s firm conviction that
the CD has the mandate, membership and the rules of procedures to discharge its functions.
Turkey also supported the UN General Assembly resolution on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification and welcomes the establishment of the Group of Experts. We deem multilateral
nuclear verification capabilities necessary for the realization and maintenance of a world
without nuclear weapons. It is with this understanding that Turkey participates in the
International Partnership on Verification of Nuclear Disarmament (IPNDV).
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among States of the regions concerned is an important non-proliferation and disarmament
measure.
A pending critical commitment of the 1995 Review Conference is the convening of an
International Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the
Middle East. This commitment will continue to be an essential element of this review cycle.
Mr Chairman,
IAEA Safeguards is a vital component of the global non-proliferation regime. Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and its Additional Protocol are the essential tools establishing a
solid verification standard.
We call on those states that have not yet done so, to sign, ratify and implement their CSAs
and Additional Protocols without further delay.
3
Turkey underscores the crucial role of export controls to support the fulfilment of nuclear
non-proliferation obligations of NPT.
Unfortunately, last year the nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches continued to be carried
out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) in violation of UN Security
Council Resolutions. While we welcome the recent period of restraint, we also urge the
DPRK to comply with its international obligations in full and also to return to the NPT at an
early date and IAEA Safeguards, to ratify CTBT.
The agreement on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a significant diplomatic
achievement for peace and stability not only for the region but also on a global scale. It
testifies to the continued relevance not only of the NPT, but also of the practice of solving
disagreements through diplomatic means. It is noteworthy that all reports of the International
Atomic Energy Agency confirm Iran’s compliance. The Plan has been successful and it
should be preserved. We are concerned about the ongoing uncertainty regarding the future of
the JCPoA.
The risk of acquisition of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their delivery means by
terrorists and other non-state actors should not be underestimated. We need to remain vigilant
and cooperate to avoid possible attacks involving nuclear and radiological materials. UN
Security Council Resolution 1540, complemented by resolution 2325, remains a key part of
the non-proliferation architecture. As a party to all export control regimes, Turkey deems
them to be invaluable tools.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey strongly supports the inalienable rights of states to benefit from the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Nuclear safety and security are both national responsibilities. Keeping a high level of safety
and security with respect to nuclear facilities and material are conducive to extending the
benefits of peaceful nuclear technology globally.
The IAEA, by administering international nuclear safeguards in accordance with the NPT, has
a pivotal role in the non-proliferation regime. It also has a leading role in strengthening the
international nuclear security framework.
The Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) is the most direct and tangible service of the
Agency, geared towards introducing and promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology
worldwide, in conformity with Article IV.
As an embarking country, Turkey has concluded both a CSA and Additional Protocol with the
IAEA. The Broader Conclusion obtained from the Agency in 2012, confirming that all
nuclear materials in Turkey have remained in peaceful activities, proves the high standards
that Turkey’s system of accounting and control of nuclear material has reached.
We also welcome the entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM).
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey, together with its partners at the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI), will continue to play a constructive role in bridging positions during the 2020 NPT 
4
Review Cycle. The NPDI has submitted for consideration at this PrepCom, several working
papers such as safeguards, transparency, strengthening the review process.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our sincere wish for the success of this PrepCom.
It provides us an opportunity to start looking for common areas to make progress. We are here
to reaffirm the relevance of the NPT and the importance of continued progress towards
achieving its key objectives.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the NPT’s opening to signature. Along these years,
despite many challenges, the Treaty has made progress. It has found ground for compromise
in order to advance our shared goal of a more secure world. This should continue to be our
basis.
Thank you. 