Mr. Chairman,
As my delegation is taking the floor for the first time, I would like to join others in congratulating you on assuming the chairmanship of the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the NPT 2010 Review Conference. I am sure that your experience and personal talents will enable you to conduct our proceedings effectively. I would like to assure you of the full cooperation and support of my delegation in the performance of your duties.
The NPT is the fundamental instrument in our global endeavour of non-proliferation and disarmament. Despite the fact that it has been serving our collective security interests for four decades, we have not been able to overcome the challenges that it has been facing for so long.
This unique regime is founded on a "grand bargain" that resembles an equilateral triangle with equal sides, comers and degrees. As such, the three comers need to rest on equal footing. And, thus, the commitment to the fulfilment of the respective legal and political obligations contained in the NPT by all states-parties, nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states alike, should be reaffirmed.
Fair treatment of the three pillars constitutes the rationale behind our approach to the NPT regime. Although it is neither perfect nor universal, it has so far been instrumental in restraining nuclear proliferation, in inspiring steps for disarmament and in establishing a fairly well international cooperation for peaceful use.
The NPT regime has helped to slow, and in some cases to reverse, the spread of military nuclear capability, but it has not been able to prevent it completely. Yet, we believe that the NPT is a unique and irreplaceable multilateral instrument which should continue to play a vital role in addressing not only the old but also the new security challenges in the nuclear
Entire disarmament accords of the international community, including the NPT constitute the integral parts of the perennial quest for non-proliferation and disarmament. From a wider perspective, the NPT and the other essential elements of the fight against the proliferation of WMD, such as the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical Weapons Convention are inalienable.
Check against delivery
field,
We live in a world where security has become indivisible. We all benefit from a secure environment and suffer when it is absent.
We therefore need to build consensus on measures to meet challenges or common threats. Our ability to respond efficiently to the most pressing threats to international peace and security depends heavily on how we make best use of multilateral fora, including the NPT review process.
We shall be expressing our views on specific issues with regard to each of the clusters in the following days. Today, I should like to take the opportunity to elaborate briefly on our policy in general.
Turkey's security policy excludes the production and use of all kinds of WMD. Our support for the fight against the proliferation of WMD stems from real security concerns, and is more than an intellectual exercise for us. Located in a region of particular concern with respect to proliferation of WMD, Turkey takes part in all collective efforts aimed at devising measures to reverse this disturbing trend. We are also concerned with the progressive increase in the range and accuracy of delivery vehicles of WMD.
The risk of acquisition by terrorists of WMD and their delivery vehicles should not be underestimated either. While we condemn terrorism in all its forms, which cannot be justified under any pretext, we need to remain vigilant and cooperate to avoid possible heinous acts involving nuclear and radioactive materials. In this regard, we need to continue to give utmost importance to the effective implementation of all legal means available, including UNSCR 1540.
Hence, we advocate global, overall disarmament and support all efforts in the field of sustaining international security through multilateral arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament. Accordingly, Turkey is a party to all international non-proliferation instruments and export control regimes and wishes to see the universalisation, effective implementation and further strengthening of them.
The NPT regime is no exception in that context. Past achievements, such as those of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences are testimonies to the expertise, knowledge and wisdom, which have always been present in this regime.
As I stated earlier, we are fully committed to the implementation of the NPT in all its three mutually reinforcing pillars, disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The integrity and credibility of the NPT regime require renewed commitment and equal treatment of these three dimensions.
Here, it might be worthwhile to remember that nuclear disarmament measures agreed to at the 1995 Review Conference culminated in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference. With the Thirteen Practical Steps of 2000, nuclear disarmament was provided with a positive impetus, to proceed at the expense of nuclear arms race.
There seems no reason why the NPT community should not be able to build on them, and to defy the challenges facing this unique regime. We are heartened to observe that the global thinking is in favour of preservation, and indeed strengthening of the NPT.
Regarding non-proliferation and disarmament as mutually endorsing, Turkey will spare no efforts to continue to promote issues of key importance for the sustainability of the NPT in the long run. These include, inter alia, universalisation of the Treaty, further reduction of nuclear weapons and strengthening of the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) safeguards system. We consider those Agreements and Additional Protocols as the current IAEA verification standard.
Equally important are early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty and initiation of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament (CD) on a fissile material cut-off Treaty. We hope that the document CD/1840 will pave the way for negotiations on an FMCT. Indeed, it appears to be the best possible compromise that we can reach.
Entry into force of the CTBT will be the first concrete step to overcome the difficulties in non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. As an evidence of our strong commitment to achieve the universal goals of the CTBT, Turkey will host a Cross-Regional Workshop on CTBTO International Cooperation entitled "Twelve Years of CTBT: Achievements and perspectives" in Istanbul from 1 to 2 July 2008. The purpose of the meeting is to review the CTBT-related achievements since the treaty was opened for signature in 1996 and to offer perspectives for the future. It would include the broader context of the global efforts against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Participants from countries representing al] geographic regions and various speakers and staff members of the Commission are expected to attend.
Appropriate functioning of export controls, reinforcement of nuclear-weapon-free zones freely arrived at, and their extension to other regions of the world are also indispensable within the NPT regime. On that account, we support the establishment of an effectively verifiable zone, free of WMDs and their means of delivery in the Middle East, and encourage all efforts for developing a common regional understanding on this project, with the participation of all parties concerned.
As for the third pillar, Turkey recognizes the importance of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology and the crucial role the IAEA plays in this regard. At the same time, we underline with due diligence the complementary and mutually reinforcing nature of the NPT and the delicate balance of rights and obligations enshrined in the Treaty. We also recognize the fact that any significant and risk-free increase in nuclear power would only be possible if the international community could meet certain challenges which include advancement in innovative and evolutionary technologies, and meeting concerns about waste, proliferation, safety and security.
Mr. Chairman,
We can progress on such building blocks to revitalize the spirit of 1995 and 2000, The ultimate goal should be the preservation of Treaty-based nuclear arms control. In our belief, this is indispensable for active promotion of collective security and cooperation for nuclear disarmament.
Irreversibility and transparency ought to steer us in that direction. Irreversible progress on the disarmament front will reinforce the two other pillars, while transparency will help to create the atmosphere conducive to mutual trust.
Parallel advances in all fronts will revalidate the status of NPT as the cornerstone of global nuclear non-proliferation and the essential basis for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament.
We will continue to work constructively towards a substantive outcome for the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.