UAE Statement
By H.E. Ambassador Hamad Alkaabi , Permanent Representative oft he
UAE tot he IAEA
NPT PrepCom 2014 - General Debate
*Check upon delivery
Mr Chairman,
I would like at the outset to congratulate you on your appointment as the
chair of the third preparatory committee for the NPT 2015 review
conference. I am confident that your leadership and diplomatic skills will
facilitate a positive outcome of this meeting. I assure you the full support of
my delegation.
My delegation associates itself with the statements read on behalf of NAM,
the statement read on behalf of the Arab Group, and the statement read on
behalf of NPDI countries....
In addition, I would like to provide the following statement on a national
capacity.
Mr Chairman,
The UAE, is committed to ensuring global security. We demonstrated this
endeavor by the decision to join the NPT in 1995, Followed by ratification
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 2000 , the conclusion of
the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement in 2003 and bringing in force the
Additional Protocol in 2010.
UAE has adopted a detailed policy on the development of a peaceful
nuclear energy programme in 2008, endorsed important principles of
complete transparency, the commitment to the highest standards of safety,
security, non-proliferation and full cooperation with the IAEA as
fundamental principles by which all nuclear activities and programmes
should be governed.
UAE supports the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a
crucial pillar of the NPT framework; we started the construction of the first
two nuclear power reactors in 2012 and 2013 respectively. The NPT
review process should give enough balance to strengthening the peaceful
uses pillar of the treaty while addressing non-proliferation and
disarmament concerns .
The IAEA has a central and crucial role to play in assisting countries to
develop nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner while its safeguards
system ensures the peaceful nature of nuclear activities; the IAEA role and
mandate should continue to be strengthened
Mr. Chairman,
2010 NPT review conference was a positive one in a sense that we all
agreed on the way forward on how to maintain and strengthen the
implementation of the treaty. The NPT framework is crucial and
fundamental part of not only the non-proliferation regime but general
global security and therefore we should all spare no efforts in ensuring
the full implementation and universalization of the treaty.
However, we need to sincerely face the serious challenges to the NPT
regime today. Generally, these are the lack of concrete steps toward
disarmament; the existence of states outside the treaty; issues of
noncompliance; and continued nuclear proliferation threats; and the
challenges surrounding the withdrawal from the treaty.
These challenges call for measures to strengthen the treaty ; the PrepCom
and review process should focus on these challenges. The 2010 Action Plan
implementation should remain the focal point for strengthening the NPT
framework as agreed by all state parties.
Mr. Chairman,
Concerning Non-Proliferation, my delegation has outlined its position and
basic principles on this matter in a number of international fora. While we
note that every State, party to the NPT, has the right to the use and
the development of peaceful nuclear technology; such right comes with
obligations. Mutual trust and confidence in the exclusive peaceful nature
of nuclear programs are essential building blocks of the NPT regime. States
with nuclear activities should fully adhere to comprehensive safeguards
measures; fully cooperate with the IAEA; Take required steps to fully
address all international concerns and obligations including those of
relevant UNSC and IAEA resolutions. Implementation of the Additional
Protocol will facilitate the full support and confidence of the international
community and is an important tool to maintain the credibility of IAEA
safeguards system.
Mr. Chairman, 
The NPT has recognized the relationship between nuclear non-proliferation
and nuclear disarmament. Implementing measures agreed upon in the area
of disarmament will strengthen non-proliferation efforts and the NPT
framework in general Moreover, the UAE shares the view that the only way
to ensure the non-use or non-threat to use of nuclear weapons is the total
elimination of such weapons. My delegation supports the on going
discussion on humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons
with an objective to promote the implementation of the NPT
Mr. Chairman,
As for the nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East, my delegation is
disappointed thatno progress was achieved. The establishment of the
nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East is a long due and important
step for the NPT regime. UAE deeply regrets that 2012 conference on the
establishment of such a zone did not take place, and call on the conveners to
take up their responsibilities in holding the conference soon and without
further delay.
Successful progress on the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in
the Middle East will demonstrate the effectiveness of the treaty to achieve
its objectives. UAE will continue to support efforts by the facilitator, H.E
Ambassador Laajava for this endeavor.
Mr Chairman
When it comes to verification, my delegation would also like to emphasize
the importance of the CTBT's entry into force. The CTBT is an important
tool for building mutual trust and confidence, which is needed to reduce the
threat posed by nuclear weapons.. The UAE has condemned the nuclear
tests by the DPRK as another provocative step that endangers the NPT
regime . The nuclear tests highlight the importance of the CTBT and call for
a swift response and diplomatic efforts to bring in force the CTBT.
Mr. Chairman,
To conclude: The UAE continues to take further tangible steps to support
the implementation of action plan adopted in the 2010 NPT Review
Conference. NPT review process comes with a lot of challenges, but given
the importance we attach to the NPT framework in ensuring global peace
and security, the UAE hopes that all delegations will work together
constructively to achieve a positive outcome.