I congratulate you on your election to preside over this important 2010 NPT Review Conference. Uganda is confident that your able leadership will facilitate a successful outcome, and I assure you of our full cooperation.
My delegation aligns itself with the Statement delivered by the Foreign Minister of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. President,
The dangers confronting the international community as a result of nuclear proliferation and the urgency of taking concrete steps to address them is more urgent than ever before. The proliferation of nuclear weapons poses a serious threat to international peace and security, and as long as some countries possess nuclear weapons, others may aspire to get them.
Uganda remains committed to the Non-Proliferation Treaty out of the shared conviction that it remains the cornerstone of multilateral efforts in containing the threat of nuclear proliferation and providing a framework for nuclear disarmament.
This NPT review conference provides an important and timely opportunity for all countries to demonstrate the commitment and cooperation necessary to reaffirm the ideals and purpose of the NPT.
We support a package of proposals that would recognize past commitments and advance the Treaty's core principles to achieve outcomes that strengthen nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, and facilitate access to peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. President,
Uganda welcomes the conclusion of the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty between the Russian Federation and United States of America. It is commendable because such arms reduction demonstrates commitment to achieve nuclear disarmament, and enhance international peace and security.
It is important that all countries take their obligations seriously so that the NPT fully achieves its objectives. In this regard, there is need to ensure implementation of all NPT pillars in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner and to work towards the universalisation of the Treaty.
We call on nuclear states to undertake measures to achieve total elimination of their * nuclear arsenals, to abide by their treaty obligations, and for all states that are not party to the NPT to accede to it and implement their obligations.
We fully support the banning of all nuclear explosions. We believe that the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty is a good complementary Instrument to the NPT.
Uganda supports the efforts aimed at establishing nuclear weapon free -zones. In this regard, we welcome and commend the nuclear weapon free -zones in Latin America and the Caribbean, South Pacific, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, Africa and Mongolia as positive developments towards a nuclear free world. We encourage more regions to emulate these positive developments.
Mr. President,
The availability of reliable, cost-effective and environmentally friendly energy is a critical factor for industrialization and economic development. However, many developing countries face severe energy deficits.
As a developing country, Uganda underlines the need to develop further international cooperation in promoting the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Uganda has deposits of Uranium and is keen to harness this potential. It is important that non-nuclear states are supported to develop and utilize nuclear energy for a wide range of peaceful uses.
We are convinced that nuclear energy can provide an indispensable, cost-effective, and clean source of energy in the long-term to address energy deficits. It is also useful in medicine, agriculture, water management, and research among other uses.
Mr. President,
Uganda has put in place an institutional framework to facilitate the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In October 2008, the Atomic Energy Law was enacted, and an Atomic Energy Council is now operational. We call for increased support and capacity building for the developing countries in the field of nuclear energy.
In conclusion, Uganda looks forward to this Review Conference making further progress in strengthening the NPT regime, ensuring its implementation in an equitable, balanced and non- discriminatory manner, and universalizing of the Treaty.
Thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



