Check against delivery
UNITED KINGDOM
GENERAL STATEMENT
By
Ambassador Jo Adamson
UK Ambassador
to the
Conference on Disarmament
Head of the United Kingdom Delegation
at the
2012 Prepatory Committee for the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
VIENNA, 30 APRIL 2012
Please check against delivery
Check against delivery
UNITED KINGDOM
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR JO ADAMSON TO THE FIRST PREPARATORY
COMMITTEE FOR THE NINTH REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS: VIENNA, 30 APRIL ‒ 11
MAY 2012
GENERAL STATEMENT
Introduction
1. I congratulate you, Mr. Chairman on your appointment and assure you of our support
in your efforts to ensure a successful outcome to this Preparatory Committee.
2. The United Kingdom aligns itself with the statement given on behalf of the European
Union.
3. I would now like to add some remarks on behalf of the Government of the United
Kingdom.
PrepCom and NPT
1. This is the first time that the NPT states parties have met formally since the 2010
Review Conference, as we are now embark on a new review cycle together. The
major success of the 2010 NPT Review Conference was the demonstrable
commitment from all 189 state parties to the grand bargain that the NPT represents,
and its three pillars of disarmament, non-proliferation and the right to peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. There was consensus support for a cross pillar action plan, for the first
time in the NPTʼs history. The significance of this should not be underestimated.
2. This was a major success for multilateralism, and we should feel proud of our
achievements, and the work of our then Chair, under the stewardship of my colleague
from the Philippines. We must now build on that success, and implement the action
plan that we all signed up to.
3. In recent years, the NPT has come under unprecedented pressure from a combination
of factors: the nuclear ambitions of Iran and North Korea; the risks of terrorist groups
acquiring nuclear materials; the expected global renaissance in civil nuclear energy
potentially leading to the dissemination of sensitive technology; and a fraying of the
international consensus that has underpinned the Treaty due the competing priorities
of states parties.
4. But all States benefit substantially from the NPT, in terms of both enhanced security
and cooperation on civil nuclear energy. It is too important to be allowed to be
undermined. The NPT must be strengthened across its three pillars during this
Review Cycle, to remain fit for purpose in a world where we continue to face threats
to international peace and security. This is at the heart of all states parties common
interest and common responsibility.
Check against delivery
5. The UK wants to bridge the perceived divides and help to build a shared
understanding of what we can all gain from the NPT. The shared success of 2010
showed that we are moving in the right direction; the UK believes that we must
continue to build on that positive momentum, right the way through to the RevCon in
2015.
1. 2011 was the so-called ʻfallow yearʼ in the cycle, and yet we saw the second P5
Conference in Paris, agreement by the P5 and ASEAN on the P5 Protocol to the
South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone, which we will discuss in greater detail
over the next two weeks, promising steps forward on the Middle East WMD Free
Zone Conference, and a momentous report from the IAEA on the military dimensions
of Iranʼs nuclear programme.
7. This Preparatory Committee has a strong procedural remit, being the first in the
review cycle, but we must also look to build on the consensus from 2010, and the
positive developments that we saw in 2011. The UK sees this first PrepCom as an
opportunity for state parties to collectively reaffirm their unconditional support for the
NPT and their commitment to action plan implementation.
Disarmament
8. As a nuclear weapon state, the United Kingdom is fully aware that it has particular
responsibilities to fulfil. The UK remains fully committed to the long-term goal of a
world without nuclear weapons and we believe that we have a strong track record in
meeting our disarmament commitments and obligations under the NPT.
9. As long as large arsenals of nuclear weapons remain and the risk of nuclear
proliferation continues, the UKʼs judgement is that only a credible nuclear capability
can provide the necessary ultimate guarantee to our national security. The UK
Government is therefore committed to maintaining a minimum national nuclear
deterrent, and to proceeding with the renewal of Trident and the submarine
replacement programme.
10. We have taken a number of additional important disarmament steps during and since
the 2010 Review Conference, and we will give further detail of these measures in our
statement under Pillar I. But, in general terms, these important confidence building
measures include increasing the UKʼs transparency by announcing for the first time
the overall size of our warhead stockpile and publishing the most detailed Security
and Defence Review in our history, reducing the number of warheads on our
submarines, reducing our nuclear weapon stockpile and drawing up an updated
negative security assurance to non-nuclear weapon states. We have already started
the implementation of these measures, and have started to reduce our warhead
numbers 15 years ahead of schedule.
11. We also continue to work closely with our P5 partners on implementation of the NPT
Action Plan. Co-operation within the P5 has come a long way. Let us not forget that
at the height of the Cold War, which many of us in this room can remember well,
these same states that now meet recurrently to talk about disarmament confidence 
Check against delivery
building measures, on matters that go right to the heart of national security, were
almost on the brink of confrontation.
12. The UK is committed to building trust between nuclear and non-nuclear weapon
states, and taking tangible steps towards a safer world where the UK and others are
able to relinquish their nuclear weapons. Our close partnership with Norway on the
complex issues surrounding nuclear warhead dismantlement verification demonstrates
this. Again, the UK will provide more detail on our collaboration with Norway on
verification in the Cluster I statement. But I would also like to take this opportunity at
the early stages of PrepCom to say that weʼll also host a side event on this verification
workstream, which I would encourage all states parties to attend.
13. And finally, on the wider disarmament agenda, let me reiterate that the UK will
continue work with our international partners to continue making every effort possible
to promote Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and to get
negotiations started on a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty in the Conference on
Disarmament.
Non-Proliferation
14. We are committed to strengthening the non-proliferation architecture, to build trust
between neighbors, and to combat programmes of concern ‒ safeguarding the security
of NPT states parties. We welcome the E3 plus 3 and Iran talks on 14 April in
Istanbul and the statement issued there by Baroness Ashton. We will give further
detail of the UK position on non-proliferation during the cluster session II. But allow
me to highlight some of the key points now.
15. Some States Parties may suggest that it is hypocritical for the UK to maintain its
nuclear weapons while calling on others to desist from their development. Let me
make clear that the UK does not insist on "non-proliferation first." The UK fully
accepts that progress must be made across all three pillars in parallel in order to fulfill
the ʻGrand Bargainʼ at the heart of the NPT.
16. Equally, none of us should be in any doubt that the Treaty currently faces challenges
from within. Article IV provides for the enjoyment of the benefits of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. But these inalienable rights come hand in hand with obligations.
Obligations to comply fully with the provisions of Articles I, II and III of the Treaty.
Those who would develop clandestine nuclear weapons programmes through
manipulation of Treaty rights should continue to be taken firmly to task by the
international community. We must work together to ensure that all States Party fulfill
their obligations to the Treaty so that all of us can enjoy those benefits in peace.

Peaceful uses
17. The UK is committed to supporting the expansion of civil nuclear, whilst ensuring
that neither safety, security nor non-proliferation are compromised as enshrined in the
NPT. We recognise that global energy demand is increasing and we remain
committed to promoting the safe expansion of nuclear energy for those States who 
Check against delivery
choose to use it. The UK will give further details of actions undertaken as part of our
commitment to the action plan during the Pillar III cluster.
18. Finally, I would like to take the opportunity to highlight a further UK side event on
closing the gap on nuclear skills training, taking place on Wed 9th May, and again,
encourage all States Parties to send a representative where possible.
CONCLUSION
19. The UK firmly believes that NPT offers the best chance we have of getting the
balance right on nuclear issues: with progress towards the long term goal of a world
free of the threat of nuclear weapons, while promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. The Action Plan, as agreed at the 2010 RevCon, is our roadmap on how to
deliver that long term goal. It is a goal to which I am personally committed. If we
fail, we risk the uncontrolled spread of nuclear weapons to rogue states and terrorist
groups. It is a shared responsibility of us all to ensure we do not fail. And I hope that
the States Parties represented at the PrepCom for the next two weeks are ready and
willing to take on that responsibility. 