Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the Ukrainian Delegation, I wish to extend our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the Chairmanship of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We are confident that with your leadership, diplomatic skills as well as vast knowledge and experience in issues related to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, this PrepCom's session would result in agreeing on important measures aimed at further strengthening of the regime of nuclear non-proliferation. In this regard, please be assured in our support and full cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
The international community continues to be challenged by the threats brought about by the risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and means of their delivery. In today's changing global security environment the strengthening of international and national legal norms and instruments to prevent the WMD proliferation remains to be a top priority. A broad, comprehensive and universally acceptable concept is needed to counter effectively risks which may arise from the WMD proliferation. The NPT continues to be the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament in accordance with its article VI, and an important element in further development of nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes. We continue to work towards universal accession to the NPT and call upon those States, which are not yet Parties to it, to join the Treaty. In this context, prevention of nuclear proliferation and the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, inter alia, reduction of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, overall reduction of the global stockpiles of nuclear weapons are crucial for the global peace and security. Ukraine welcomes the intent of the USA and the Russian Federation, stated in its Joint Declaration of 6 April 2008, to exercise further reduction of their strategic nuclear potentials and expects that it will result in elaboration of legal agreement based on principles of verification, transparency and irreversibility. We also call upon all States-possessors of nuclear weapons to demonstrate their political will and take adequate measures to reduce their nuclear arsenals, thus making substantial contribution to the maintenance and reinforcement of international peace and stability. Taking this opportunity I would also like to express our support to Joint U.S.-Russian Statement on the Treaty on the Elimination of Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles at the 62nd Session of the UN General Assembly, in which two states called on all interested countries to discuss the possibility of imparting a global character to this important regime leading to destruction of appropriate types of missiles and the cessation of associated programs. We expect concrete proposals from the authors of this initiative and express our readiness to participate at the relevant endeavors.
Mr. Chairman,
Ukraine recognizes the inalienable right of the NPT Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I and II of the NPT. However, maintaining the balance between rights and obligations envisaged in the Treaty is essential. Ukraine recognizes the special role of the IAEA, its safeguards system and stands for enhancement of its effectiveness.
We remain confident that all processes should go along with the overall improvement of international situation in other spheres, establishment and practical implementation of universal security guarantees, adherence by all States and international organizations to the norms and basic principles of international law, unconditional compliance with their obligations, consolidation of an atmosphere of mutual trust.
No doubt that accordance of the credible negative security assurances in the form of an international legally binding instrument will substantially enhance the nuclear non-proliferation regime, especially given the latest developments in the world's policy. We call upon all nuclear weapon states to acknowledge the value of negative security assurances and strictly adhere to their existing respective pledges.
I would also like to reiterate the vital importance of the CTBT's universalisation. Ukraine, whose role in the nuclear disarmament can serve as an example, remains to be one of the strongest and consistent supporters of the standing international instruments in this field. We call upon all States, particularly those listed in Annex II of the Treaty, to adhere the CTBT without delay and unconditionally.
It is of the greatest importance that the integrity of the norms set by the CTBT is respected. Pending the Treaty's entry into force, the moratorium on nuclear tests or any other nuclear explosions should be maintained. We call upon all states to refrain from any action contrary to the Treaty and to further demonstrate their firm determination to observe the CTBT norms and keep to their commitments once the Treaty enters into force.
Ukraine underscores significance of establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. In this context we consider the respective 1995 NPT Review Conference resolution valid until its goals and objectives are achieved.
Mr. Chairman,
In the year 2010 we will commemorate the 40th anniversary of the NPT entry into force. The Review Process provides all Parties with an important opportunity to assess the implementation of each article of the Treaty and to facilitate elaboration of recommendations to the Review Conference. This is a common task for all to establish a clear view what this review process for the NPT is intended to achieve and what ways should be laid in foundation of reaching this goal.
To our view, the review process has two different but related objectives and tasks. The first one is to overcome consequences of review failure in 2005 for revalidating the multilateral regime against nuclear proliferation, demonstrating the political will and readiness of the States Parties to increase its credibility and to enable States to reinvest in the Treaty's purposes and implementation. The second is to look forward and finalize establishment of appropriate mechanism in order to ensure achievement of nuclear non-proliferation goals.
I do believe that within this process it would be possible to reach progress on issues related to:
•	Introduction of more transparency and relevant mechanisms for verified reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery;
•	Negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;
•	Establishment of a subsidiary body on security assurances, to elaborate a universal, non-conditional and legally binding instrument on negative security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States;
•	Consideration of additional measures to further strengthen the physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities in light of the heightened risk of nuclear
terrorism;
•	International cooperation in respect of the promotion of multilateralism in the nuclear fuel cycle and the supply of nuclear fuel;
•	Responsive measures to withdrawal from the Treaty;
•	Ensuring implementation of the 1995 and 2000 NPT Review Conferences' resolutions and decisions, including development of new measures aimed at reaching the NPT goals and objectives.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to inform the members of the Committee that this year Ukraine is planning to introduce within the 63rd session of the United Nations General Assembly draft resolution "Towards the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" intended to give additional impetus to works within the NPT Review Process. We hope that this initiative would be supported by all NPT Member States and meets the consensus within the next session of General Assembly.
Thank you.