\Mr. President,
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you with assuming this important office. I am confident that under your able leadership the Conference will go down in history as a success- story. Please be assured of Ukraine's full support in your endeavors.
Distinguished delegates,
I am addressing the Conference as the representative of a State which 16 years ago made unprecedented move and voluntarily denounced its inherited nuclear arsenal - the world's third largest at the time. In 1994 Ukraine joined the NPT as non-nuclear state and since then has been consistently undertaking steps aimed at making nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation work. We are deeply convinced that nuclear weapons do not strengthen security, but rather create more tensions and risks for states who strive to acquire them.
It is widely recognized that Ukraine's action enhanced the NPT regime, had a beneficial impact on international security and strategic stability, and created favorable conditions for further steps to reduce nuclear arsenals.
Our decision, which can serve as an example for others, has been made with clear understanding that relevant political security assurances, which Ukraine received in 1994 through the Budapest Memorandum, constitute an integral part of our nuclear disarmament move.
It is our strong position that the security assurances for the states which renounced their nuclear arsenals, as well as for the states which are non-members of any military alliances, have to be reflected in a legally binding international document. It is also important that the basic right of states to choose for themselves means for providing national security and national interests should be duly taken into account in the process of elaboration of international and regional security structures.
Ukraine- stands firm in its disarmament choice. The most recent contribution of my country to this course is the decision, announced by the President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych this April in Washington, to get rid of all national stocks of high enriched uranium by 2012, provided there is sufficient international assistance. As the first step, we will remove even this year a substantial part of our stock for its downgrading to the low enriched uranium to be used by the Ukrainian nuclear research facilities.
The meaning of our voluntary step is crystal clear - Ukraine takes nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament seriously. We expect that our example will serve as a pattern for others. Our decision is also another proof of our commitment to the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1887(2009).
Turning to the Treaty itself, I should like to emphasize that it is not only an essential basis for pursuing nuclear disarmament. It is a minor of global political reality. For forty years the Treaty has been at the core of international efforts aimed at containing spread of nuclear weapons. Likewise, for forty years States have been taking steps to reach this goal. A lot has been achieved, indeed.
Yet, although it seems that the fear of global nuclear war has receded irrevocably, two major challenges are still in place. First, despite all reduction efforts, existing nuclear arsenals are striking. Second, a number of gaps in the nuclear non-proliferation regime remain. Both pose a threat to world peace and security.
Recent events give us hope that States realize the dramatic importance of these challenges and are committed to addressing them resolutely. Washington Summit on Nuclear Security and signing of a new START Treaty between the United States of America and the Russian Federation are two milestone undertakings, which set the tone for further activities.
We also welcome the decision of the United States, announced yesterday by the Secretary of State H.Clinton, to go ahead with the provision of legally binding security assurances to the countries belonging to the nuclear-weapon-free zones established in Africa and the South Pacific.
Mr. President,
Ukraine firmly stands for comprehensive disarmament under effective international control. We attach paramount importance to achieving universality of and strict compliance with the NPT.
There is an urgent need to build on the results of the historic 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences. We have not only to reaffirm validity of 13 practical steps of nuclear disarmament, adopted in 2000, but to review them thoroughly and, if necessary, update and extend.
No need to say that the NPT system has been under severe strain in recent years and the International Atomic Energy Agency has been struggling with verification, compliance and enforcement challenges. Conference should pay proper attention to the implementation of non- proliferation commitments. Failure to do so will result in further erosion of the regime and will seriously affect international security.
The Treaty requires a more efficient mechanism of adequate response to today's challenges. In our view, one of the measures that will strengthen the Treaty is the elaboration of the modalities under which states can implement the Article X of the NPT.
Having said this, we would also like to underline the importance of strict compliance with the UN Security Council resolutions on the prevention of black-market supply networks, trafficking and acquisition of nuclear materials by non-State actors.
We also underscore the importance of strengthening physical protection of nuclear material and facilities given the increased risk of nuclear terrorism. There is a strong need for adherence to existing legal instruments, especially to the International Convention on the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
One of the important elements of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament is the Fissile Material Cut Off Treaty. Ukraine deeply regrets the continuing deadlock over resumption of activities of the Conference on Disarmament on this issue.
We also strongly^ hope that the renewed commitment of key states regarding the ratification of the CTBT will allow us to finally realize the long standing goal of its entry into force.
Mr. President,
Ukraine considers peaceful uses of nuclear energy equally important NPT pillar. We underscore the vital need of peaceful nuclear technology for sustainable development of nations, provided that nuclear activities are subject to full scope safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Given the rising international demand for nuclear energy, we acknowledge a number of initiatives, which can facilitate multilateral solutions for the expanding need for nuclear fuel and services, while minimizing the risk of proliferation. Their proper implementation can provide the interested countries with the necessary back-up mechanisms. Therefore, we welcome the recent agreement between the IAEA and the Russian Federation to establish a reserve of low enriched uranium (LEU) for supply to the IAEA to be located at the International Uranium Enrichment Centre in Angarsk, Russia.
Distinguished delegates,
The strengthening of safety and security of nuclear material and facilities is of even greater importance, as it was vividly demonstrated 24 years ago by the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident, which is still an open wound for Ukraine. My country's strategy to address the lingering aftereffects of Chernobyl disaster is aimed at fostering the region's long- term development and providing people with the support they need to lead safe and healthy lives.
Taking this opportunity, I would like to draw your attention to the initiative of the President of Ukraine, co-sponsored by Belarus and the Russian Federation, to convene an international conference 011 the 25th anniversary of the accident in April 2011, to mark progress towards the goal of a return to normal life and to address the issue of the safe use of nuclear energy.
Mr. President,
Finally, talking about the NPT review process itself, it would be relevant, in our view, to evaluate carefully the implementation of the 1995 and 2000 decisions on improving its effectiveness. As of now, we have on the table some very promising proposals to streamline the NPT review process, suggested by Canada. We fully support this initiative and urge all delegations to consider it carefully in the coming weeks.
Mr. President, Distinguished delegates,
The 2010 Review Conference will be successful only if we adopt decisions that are duly implemented. To achieve this, key players should project beyond 2010, work hard to develop effective action plans and allocate essential resources in order to meet proliferation challenges and, eventually, move towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
Thank you.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 12

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 11

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



