Mr. Chair,
I have the honour to congratulate you on behalf of the UAE on your election as president of the 3rd session of the preparatory committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are confident that your expertise will contribute in the success of the work of the committee. I should not fail in this occasion to commend the previous president of the second session of the committee for his efforts in enhancing our debates. I also would like to announce my country's support of the statements of the NAM and the Arab Group.
Mr. Chair,
Despite the lapse of four decades since the announcement of the system of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear weapons, progress in achieving the goal of the treaty has been veiy slow, and sometimes it was going in the wrong direction, which is a result of the continuing race among some nuclear-weapon states to develop new nuclear weapons and transfer systems as part of their policies of nuclear deterrence, this, in addition to the attempts of some non-nuclear states to seek and develop nuclear weapons, as a means of defending themselves. Such issue does not only raise our security fears of the escalation of threats resulting from the presence of theses
dangerous weapons, it also raises fears of these weapons reaching irresponsible parties and organizations, which may lead to a nuclear tragedy endangering regional and international peace and security and the future of humanity as a whole.
Mr. Chair,
The delegation of my country is concerned about the intentional negligence of the commitments pledged at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the NPT Review Conference in 2000, of which the most urgent is the compliance with the resolution on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East. The UAE calls upon the international community, especially the nuclear- weapon states to show the political will and enough flexibility during the negotiations in order to assist in the success of the current thematic debated within the frame of this preparatory session to contribute in reaching a consensus. We also stress that this session should take in consideration the contents of the two important working papers introduced by the Arab Group. In this regard we stress the following steps:
1-	Requesting Nuclear-weapon states to enter serious and effective negotiations on a gradual program that ensure their full implementation, within a time frame, of all the practical 13 steps agreed on in the 2000 conference.
2-	Reaffirming the international society's rejection of any attempts aiming to the transfer, the production, and the piling of nuclear weapons, especially in the new non-Nuclear weapon regions such as the Arab Gulf region and the neighboring regions as they still live with tension for many decades. Therefore we demand all states seeking to develop this kind of weapon and produce and pile fissile material for nuclear weapons, to rethink their policies that threatens regional and international peace and security, and take all immediate measures to ensure the halt of all these attempts in compliance with the Treaty and the principles of the international law and relevant resolutions.
3-	Taking more effective measures that demand that all countries, who did not join the Treaty on Non- proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to do so without any delay in order to strengthen the effectiveness and the universality of the treaty.
4-	Encouraging states to enter in legal agreements and arrangements that call for the establishment of regional and subregional zones free of Nuclear weapons.
5-	Reaffirming the inalienable right of countries, in particular developing countries, to develop nuclear programs for peaceful use and their right to attain peaceful nuclear technology without obstacles or discrimination, this should be verified by a non differential mechanism as an essential condition to maintain the viability of the treaty.
In this regard we wish to refer to the policy of the UAE on the evaluation and development of peaceful nuclear energy program to meet its future energy demands. Such program will be carried out with full operational transparency, high standards of safety , security and non-proliferation and with direct cooperation with IAEA and responsible experienced nations .The UAE has taken concrete steps to implement this policy, such as signing and ratifying a number of international related instruments , the latest of which was signing on the additional protocol of the Safeguards agreement, and progressing in the development of an infrastructure that ensures the utilization of nuclear energy without increasing the risk of Nuclear Proliferation as enshrined in its commitment to forgo enrichment and fuel reprocessing.
In conclusion Mr. Chairman,
We stress that dealing with the present nuclear threats and implementing the Non-Proliferation system should be based on the principles of justice, transparency and equality which will ensure the universality of the treaty and achieve the goals of saving the world from the possibilities of any nuclear confrontation or disaster. We hope that this session will achieve consensus on all main issues, which will contribute in enabling the coming Review Conference to take effective measures that will strengthen the global commitment towards Nuclear Non- Proliferation.
Thank you.