
Mr. Chairman
I have the honor, on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, to congratulate vou on \our presidency on the first session of the preparatory committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We are confident that your political expertise will contribute :o directing its meetings successfully for the good and safety of humanity.
In this occasion, we would like to associate ourselves with the --tatemems delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non Aligned Movement and the representau\e of Syria on behalf of the Arab Group.
Despite the high hopes and expectations emerged in the wi>rki following the establishment of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty (NPT) in ! l>45. that were embodied in creating a global system free from all nuclear weapons, which have direct and indirect effects on the security, stability and development of humaniiv and its future generations, yet the serious threats of nuclcar weapons still persist due to the insistence of nuclear states to keep their nuclear weapons stocks and improve their means of delivery. This is in addition to the new attempts of some States to pursue similar nuclear programs, whether openly or covertly, and the insistence of other States to remain out of this important treaty, which if continued, can lead not only to the weakening of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and raising doubts about the objectives and universality of this treaty, but also to creating a major gap in confidence among States. This comes at a time of heightened concerns over the attempts of smuggling fissile material and other hazardous material used in producing nuclear weapons by some of the non-governmental actors, and the possibility of the leakage of these weapons to the hands of irresponsible criminal and terrorist groups which can threaten the security balance and regional and international stability.
The gap between the ambitions of nuclcar states and the demands of non-nuelear-weapon states, who are committed to the provisions of the Treaty as well as relev ant laws and legal measures, is increasingly widening. This has made attaining the goals of implementing
the universality of the Treaty, which represents the main tool of international strategic disarmament and vertical and horizontal nuclear non- proliferation, ven difficult to achieve, particularly in the absence of equitable balance in the obligations and responsibilities between nuclear and non-nuclear States. Therefore, our main priority should be lo enhance our deliberations in this meeting by focusing on six main axes, which v\iii contribute towards making gradual scientific progress towards nuclear disarmament.
1-	Demanding nuclear-weapon States to implement fully, openly and without any delav aii the pledges they made during the NPT Review Conferences in 1995 ana 2000. including paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 1995 Review Conference regarding the principles and objective of disarmament and nuclear non proliferation. Nuclear-weapon States are also requested to ensure their engagement in sincere and effective negotiations which are based on a step b\ step program and a specific timetable that ensures the implementation of the 13 functional steps agreed on during the 2000 Review Conference, aiming at a complete and irreversible elimination of all their existing nuclear stocks, technology, productive capacities, and delivery systems. We stress that nuclear disarmament is the only way to avoid new forms of nuclear race or unnecessary humanitarian disasters, including the threat of nuclear terrorism.
2-	Reaffirming principles of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, especially vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, including, the prevention of emergence of new t\pes of nuclear material and weapons based on new chemical principles, and in this connection, we call on States to refrain from conducting any nuclear-weapon explosions aiming at developing or improving existing nuclear weapons.
3-	Preventing the expansion of nuclear arms race to new regions, especially the Arab Gulf region and neighboring regions that have been inflicted by tension for decades. Therefore, we demand all States, which attempt to carry out nuclear testing, developing and piling lissile material, to rethink these policies which threaten international and regional peace and security, and to take necessary measures to guarantee an end to all these endeavors in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, the principles of the international law and the relevant international legal resolutions.
4- Supporting the efforts aiming to establish an international bindinu mstrumen. that
ensures security guarantees and protection of non-nuclear-weapons States from all possibilities
of being attacked, or threatened, with nuclear weapons, until the complete ehmirution of these weapons.
5-	Taking more effective measures to ensure accession of States that are not party to the Treaty to do so in order to strengthen the universality and effectiveness of the Hvatv
6-	Encouraging States to enter into legal agreements and arrangements aiming at establishing nuclear weapons free region and sub regions. The experience of establishing these zones in the last two decades have proved to be successful in reducing nuclear iteration and creating a more stabilized and strategic environment for building confidence and enhancing cooperation and development.
7-	Reiterating the unalienable right of all States, in particular the developing States, to produce and exploit nuclear energy for scientific research and peaceful purposes, as well as their right to attain nuclear technology without discrimination or any other obstacles. In this regard, there should be a commitment to establish an impartial mechanism to monitor this end.
8-	Reaffirming the important role of the International Atomic Energy Agencv. the sole international agency entrusted with the verification of nuclear safeguards and coordinating international cooperation in the area nuclear technical cooperation. We also affirm our rejection of all attempts made by any State Party to use the Programme of Technical Cooperation of the International Atomic Energy Agency as a political tool, in violation of the Statute of the Agency.
Mr. Chairman,
Like all Arab States, the UAE, which acceded to NPT based on its belief in the virtues of transparency and universality of multilateral disarmament to the economic and social development of humanity, has recently started working towards the preparation of

a law on goods which are subject to import and export controls in order to control and criminalize the illicit traffic in the dual-use hazardous material, including nuclear equipments and material.
The UAE, which is concerned about the continued existing security concerns in the Middle East and Arab Gulf, including the crisis of Iran's nuclear program, which if not contained soon can lead to increasing the existing tension in the region, renew its demand to settle this important issue through dialogue and peaceful means, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In this context, we also express our concern about the international leniency towards Israel's refusal to accede to the NPT, the sole State in the region which possesses nuclear reactors and dangerous arsenals, which resulted in enhancing the present tension and conflict in the region caused by its occupation of the Arab and Palestinian territories. Therefore, we call upon the international community to address such exception, which, if not rectified, would pose a direct threat to the regional and international peace and security, and will result in a human and regional disaster. Therefore we appeal to this meeting to recommend to the 2010 Review Conference, to establish a subsidiary body to explore ways of effective and serious implementation of the 1995 Review Conference resolution on the Middle East, which is considered an inseparable provision of the NPT. In this connection, we stress the responsibility of the State Parties to the Treaty, especially the nuclear- weapons possessing States, to exert all efforts in order to compel Israel to accede, without conditions, to the NPT and comply to the prov isions on the Middle East resolution, which includes dismantling its military nuclear facilities and subjecting them to the safeguard of the IAEA, similar to other States in the region, refrain from delivering to Israel all financial and technical assistance that is used in activities of nuclear nature and ensure its compliance in order to end the escalation uf security measures in the Middle East region and make it free of nuclear weapons , similar to other regions in the world.
Mr. Chairman,
Finally, we reaffirm that addressing nuclear threats and achieving non-proliferation should be based on the principles of justice, transparency and equalh} in order to ensure the universality of the NPT, and protect the world from possible catastrophic nuclear confrontation. We hope that the deliberations of this preparatory session will lead to a consensus on the principal issues considered in this meeting, which will enable the corning Review Conference to take the necessary effective measures to ensure the world's commitment to NPT.
Thank you Mr. Chairman