1
U.S. Statement by Under Secretary Rose Gottemoeller
Third Meeting of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
United Nations New York, New York
April 29, 2014
As Delivered
Mr. Chairman, I join others in congratulating you on your appointment. The United States is
committed to working constructively with you and the other distinguished delegates here as we
prepare for next year’s important Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Let me begin by offering this message on behalf of the U.S. Secretary of State, John Kerry:
“As we approach the 45th anniversary of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty’s entry
into force, let us take a moment to appreciate how remarkably well the Treaty has stood
the test of time. The NPT remains the cornerstone of the global nonproliferation
regime. Its three mutually reinforcing pillars constitute an essential legal barrier to the
further spread of nuclear weapons, the foundation of efforts to further reduce existing
nuclear arsenals, and the vehicle for promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
technology under appropriate safeguards.
At this final session of the Preparatory Committee before the 2015 Review Conference,
the United States urges all States Parties to take stock of progress made in implementing
the 2010 Action Plan, identify remaining obstacles, and work to find common ground on
ways to overcome them. We look forward to reporting detailed information on our efforts
to translate those actions into accomplishments.
Let me assure you that the United States is more committed than ever to pursuing full
implementation of the Treaty, as well as finding comprehensive solutions to the
challenges it faces, to ensure that our children and grandchildren can enjoy the peace and
security of a world without nuclear weapons. There is much hard work to be done, and
there are no shortcuts or easy ways out. I wish this Preparatory Committee well and offer
my hope for a productive and positive session that puts us on a path to success in 2015.”
Mr. Chairman, the United States is here to work. For nearly seven decades, the international
community has struggled with the profound challenge nuclear weapons pose to our security as
nations and our survival as human beings. My recent trips to the Marshall Islands and Hiroshima
were potent reminders of the need to persevere in confronting this challenge. It is imperative
that we make sure that people remember the human impact of nuclear weapons. Indeed, it is the
United States’ deep understanding of the consequences of nuclear weapons use – including the 
2
devastating health effects – that has guided and motivated our efforts to reduce and ultimately
eliminate these most hazardous weapons.
The NPT plays a central role in our pursuit of a nuclear weapons-free world. Before the Treaty
was created, many feared that the number of states with nuclear weapons would grow at an
exponential rate, with incalculable risks of catastrophic nuclear confrontations.
The NPT stemmed the tide of proliferation and today, the complementary and reinforcing pillars
of the Treaty bring important benefits to all NPT parties. The United States is committed to
action on all fronts to strengthen the NPT. We have provided a comprehensive report as a
working paper for this meeting that will illustrate our strong record of accomplishment.
Mr. Chairman, we have made significant progress on disarmament since the end of the Cold
War. At its peak in 1967, the U.S. nuclear arsenal was comprised of 31,255 nuclear
weapons. To paraphrase scientist Carl Sagan, we and the Soviets were waist deep in gasoline
with some sixty thousand matches between us.
Three years later, the NPT entered into force. Today, I am pleased to announce that as of
September 2013, the number of nuclear weapons in the active U.S. arsenal has fallen to
4,804. This newly declassified number represents an 85 percent reduction in the U.S. nuclear
stockpile since 1967. It is indisputable that progress toward the NPT’s disarmament goals is
being made.
And our efforts continue. The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty – New START – with the
Russian Federation is now in its fourth successful year of implementation. In 2018, when the
central limits of the Treaty will be accomplished, our deployed strategic nuclear weapons will be
at levels not seen since the days of President Eisenhower and Premiere Khrushchev.
We are not finished. We have just passed the fifth anniversary of President Obama’s historic
speech in Prague, where he called for the peace and security of a world without nuclear
weapons. The President reiterated these goals in Berlin in June 2013. He stated that the United
States can ensure its security and that of its allies while safely pursuing further nuclear
reductions with Russia of up to one-third in the deployed strategic warhead level established in
the New START Treaty. The United States remains open to negotiate further reductions with
Russia in all categories of nuclear weapons – including strategic and non-strategic nuclear
weapons, deployed and non-deployed.
Recent actions have significantly undermined mutual trust and that trust will take time to
rebuild. Still, no one should forget that even in the darkest days of the Cold War, the United
States and the Soviet Union found it in our mutual interest to work together on reducing the
nuclear threat.
3
In addition to bilateral efforts, the P5 have just concluded our fifth conference, hosted by China
in Beijing. I would like to compliment and thank our Chinese colleagues for hosting an excellent
interchange. P5 engagement is a long-term investment designed to strengthen the NPT, build
trust, and create a stronger foundation to pursue steps toward our goal of a world without nuclear
weapons. Among other accomplishments, we achieved consensus on a P5 NPT Reporting
Framework, which has guided our national reporting to the 2014 PrepCom. In keeping with our
Action Plan commitments, we will release our report to NPT Parties later this morning.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty remains a top priority for the United
States. We are working to educate the American public on the security benefits of the Treaty, as
well as the dangerous health effects of explosive nuclear testing. Of course, there is no reason
for the remaining Annex 2 states to wait for the United States before completing their own
ratification processes. We urge all States to provide adequate financial and political support for
the completion of the CTBT verification regime and its provisional operations between now and
the entry into force of the treaty.
Mr. Chairman, multilateral nonproliferation efforts are also moving ahead. The United States is
working to support nuclear-weapon-free zones that advance regional security and bolster the
global nonproliferation regime. We look forward to signing the protocol to the Central Asian
Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty, and to working with ASEAN toward signature of the
Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty protocol.
We also remain committed to the goal of a Middle East zone free of all weapons of mass
destruction and to convening a regional conference to discuss such a zone. The recent direct
engagement among states in the region is an important step forward. We urge those states to
take advantage of this opportunity and to reach consensus on arrangements so that a conference
can take place soon.
Even with these successes, noncompliance by a few states presents a direct challenge both to
regional security and to the global nuclear nonproliferation regime. Countries that cheat on their
commitments increase the risk of conflict and further proliferation, endangering people
everywhere. It is in the interest of all parties to insist that violators return to compliance, and we
are making every effort to resolve such challenges through peaceful, diplomatic means. This
sentiment applies to all international security agreements and Treaties.
To protect against additional proliferation and respond to cases of non-compliance, the
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency needs our full support and
cooperation. As States Parties have increasingly recognized, that includes the adoption of an
Additional Protocol, which bolsters regional and global security by providing a higher degree of
assurance that countries are engaged solely in peaceful nuclear cooperation. Over 120 states
have set a strong example by adopting Additional Protocols. 
4
And as I speak of setting strong examples, yesterday, Ukraine held an event celebrating its
historic decision twenty years ago, alongside Belarus and Kazakhstan, to join the NonProliferation
Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon states. Ukraine’s reaffirmation of its
nonproliferation obligations reminds us of its critical contribution to help move us toward a
world without nuclear weapons. We strongly appreciate the clear sightedness of Ukraine on this
matter.
Mr. Chairman, in support of the third pillar of the NPT, the United States will continue to
promote the safe and secure uses of peaceful nuclear technologies. We are by far the largest
contributor to IAEA nuclear assistance programs. We will continue this support and look to
increase where we can.
Since 2010, eleven states and the European Union have joined us in providing approximately
$66 million to the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative, which has helped more than 120 IAEA
Member States worldwide. We encourage all states in a position to contribute to join us in
supporting this initiative.
In closing, let us take the next two weeks to strengthen the Treaty that has brought us from a
world that was in danger of having scores of nuclear weapons states to a world where we are
cooperating to move toward to zero nuclear weapons. We know and can acknowledge the
differences among us on issues ranging from speed of action to priorities. We cannot and should
not get caught up in what divides us. We have a job to do. Let us reinvigorate our common
goals as outlined in the 2010 Action Plan, build consensus around the next logical steps in our
path and focus on the mechanisms for accomplishing those steps.
Mr. Chairman, the United States stands ready to do its part in preparing for a successful Review
Conference in 2015.
Thank you for your attention.