Dear Mr President,
I have the honor to speak on behalf of the delegations of the five Central Asian states - the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, 1 Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan.
First of ah, let me on behalf of our states to welcome you, Mr. Ambassador Libran Nuevas Cabactulan, as the President of the 2010 Review Conference. We are confident that under your leadership the work of the 2010 Review Conference of States Parties to the NPT, the results of which w will affect the global regime of nuclear non- proliferation, will be successful and constructive.
Dear Mr. President,
The idea of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones embodied in Article VII of the Np7 has gained increasing international support, which is reflected in a number of multilateral instruments, including the outcome of the NPT Review Conferences, the Genera] Assembly special sessions on disarmament and other forums. In various regions, thanks to initiatives of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, we see the strengthening of the: movement for peace and security towards "the nuclear weapon free world."
In the Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" agreed at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the promotion of nuclear-weapon-free zones has been announced as one of the main priorities. In this regard, in the preparation process for the 2010 Review Conference the States Parties to the NPT attached great importance to regional aspects of implementation of the Treaty, inducing the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
The Resolution 1887 adopted by the Security Council on September 24, 2009 has supported the steps taken to conclude nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and reaffirmed the conviction that the establishment of internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, and in accordance with the 1999 UN Disarmament Commission guidelines, enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear non- proliferation regime, and contributes toward realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
Dear Mr President,
Since the first years of their Independence, the five Central Asian states have embarked on one of the fundamental provisions of the NPT - Article VII of the Treaty, which provides for the conclusion of regional treat? ;s and agreements on the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
In order to strengthen the NPT regime and to ensure regional security, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan agreed to create a nuclear-w weapon-free zone in CentralAsia, considering this initiative as an important element of disarmament and strengthening the international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
The initiative of the regional states to establish the Central Asian Nuclear- Weapon-Free Zone (CANWFZ) has been reflected and further developed in me Almatv Declaration of the Heads of State of the Central Asian States, the Tashkent Statement of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the five States of the region and in the Communique of the Bishkek Consultative Meeting of Experts of the Central Asian Countries, the Nuclear- Weapon States and the United Nations.
The UN General Assembly resolutions 52/38 S of 9 December 1997, 53/77A of 4 December 1998, 55/33 W of 20 November 2000, and 57/69 of 22 November 2002 entitled "Establishment of a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia" have demonstrated the broad international support for the determination of the Central Asian States to achieve e the!/ goal
The Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference and the documents of the three sessions of the Preparatory Committee for the 2005 NPT Review Conference have provided support for the intension and commitment of the five Central Asian States to establish a nuclear-weapon- free zone in their region, as well as for the practical steps taken in this direction.
It should also be noted that in accordance with paragraph 25 of the Principles and Guidelines for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999 substantive session, the five Central Asian States and the five Nuclear-Weapon States held consultative meetings at expert level on the CANWFZ Treaty and its Protocol.
In this regard, it is necessary to underline the considerable support rendered by the international community to the efforts of five Central Asian States to implement the initiative of the establishment of the CANWFZ, in particular the financial assistance extended by Japan.
On September 8, 2006 in Semipalatinsk (Kazakhstan) the representatives of five Central Asia in countries signed the Treaty establishing a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia. Conclusion of the Treaty in Semipalatinsk has been deeply symbolic in terms of the nuclear non-proliferation. It is well-known that in the past the Semipalatinsk site, which has been officially closed by Kazakhstan in 1991, was one of the largest nuclear test sites of our planet where a total of 459 nuclear explosions were conducted.
The signing of the Treaty on CANWFZ can be considered as a logical and successful achievement in the development and adoption of this document.
The UN General Assembly in its resolutions 61/88 of 6 December 2006 and 63/63 of 2 December 2009 welcomed the signing of the Treat}' on CANWFZ, and also stressed that the establishment of this zone has been an important step towards strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime, promoting cooperation iiI the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the environmental rehabilitation of the ten tries affected by radioactive contamination, and the enhancing of regional and international peace and security, as well as an effective contribution to combating international terrorism and preventing nuclear materials and technologies from falling into the hands of non-State actors, primarily terrorists.
Due to the ratification of the Treat}' on CANWFZ by all five Central Asian states, it entered into the force on March 21, 2009. On October 15, 2009, the first consultative meeting of States Parties to the Treat} on CANWFZ was held in the capital of Turkmenistan.
The UN General Assembly Resolution 64/57 adopted in 2010 entitled "Towards a nuclear-weapon- free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments" has welcomed the entry into force of the Treaty on establishing the Nuclear- Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia.
We also would like to note that the factual reports of the president of the previous sessions of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT contain a provision welcoming the signing of the Treaty on CANWFZ by all the Central Asian countries In the working documents of the F first and Second sessions of the Preparatory Committee, it welcomed the efforts of Central Asian states to promote the earl}' entry into force of the Treaty on CANWFZ, arid at its Third session the Preparatory Committee welcomed the entry into force of the Treaty on establishing the Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia on March 21, 2009.
Dear Mr. President,
2010 is a crucial year for strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament In this regard, I would like to draw your attention to several important events of this } ear:
On April 12, Washington hosted the International Summit on Nuclear Security with the participation of more than 40 states which pledged to work together to implement the objectives of ensuring the security of nuclear materials and to strengthen cooperation in the sphere of non-proliferation.
On 30 April the Second Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zones, and Mongolia took place in New York. The Conference has reaffirmed that the NW-FZ in Central Asia and other nuclear weapon-free zones established in the world are making a real contribution to the implementation of the NPT, the global process of disarmament and non- proliferation, as well as to the establishment of mechanisms of enhancing the regional and global security'
It is our deep conviction that the establishment of nuclear-w weapon-free zones is one of the universal instruments to prevent pro1 iteration of nuclear weapons, which ensure^ that on the v sat areas of our world the dozens of states pledge not to transfer nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or accept such transfers from any other party, or control over such devices, either direct or indirect, as well as not to produce or acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and not to receive art}' assistance in their production
It must be stressed that the current stage in the process of creating nuclear-w weapon-free zones around the world is not final. In this regard, as the States Parties to the Treaty on CANWFZ, we call on other states and regions of the world to follow out example. We hope that all parties concerned will take practical steps to implement the proposal to establish a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle East.
To promote the good practice of establishing of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the w old, we are suggesting accelerate ting the institutionalization of the status of all the existing zones with the provision of the negative security assurances by Nuclear-Weapon States.
Dear Mi. President,
It gives me a great pleasure to introduce,, on behalf of the delegations of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan, a Working Document on the Establishment of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone prepared by the collective efforts of our counties.
The Working Document reflects the progress made since the signing of the treat)' on CANWFZ in 2006, and reaffirms our strong commitment to continue the efforts aimed at effect iv* ■implementation of the provisions of this Treaty.
In conclusion, allow me to express, Mr. President, the common hope of the Central Asian states that the submitted Working Document, will be supported by the States Parties of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT, which will create favorable conditions to reflect its main points in the final report of the Conference.
Thank you for your attention.













 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3






Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



