SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
STATEMENT
by H.E. Mr. Le Hoai Trung
866 UNITED NATIONS PLAZA
SUITE 435
NEW YORK, NY 10017
Head of the Vietnamese delegation at the General Debate of the 3rd Session of
the Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
New York, 29 April 2014
Mr. Chairman,
1. Allow me at the outset to extend our warm congratulations on your election
as the Chairman of this important session of the Preparatory Committee of the 2015
Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT). It is our
conviction that under your able leadership, this session would arrive at a successful
outcome that would lay a solid foundation for the 2015 Review Conference. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by H.E. Mr. Natalegawa,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned
States Parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
2. As noted by previous speakers, this year's session bears great importance
as we enter the final stages of preparation for the 2015 Review Conference. It is all
the more significant as a number of great challenges still lay ahead. According to a
number of researches, the total number of nuclear warheads is estimated to be at
approximately 17.000, more than enough to put humankind at continued risk of total
destruction many times over. Furthermore, nuclear weapons continue to claim a
leading role in strategic doctrines of states that possess this kind of weapons of mass
destruction. Nuclear disarmament, as the top priority in efforts towards general and
complete disarmament, still lags behind progress in implementation of the 2010 64-
point Action Plan in other areas, to name a few daunting tasks ahead.
3. Against that backdrop, the international community, including states parties
to NPT, has great responsibility to redouble its efforts to ensure that the 2015
RevCon would transpire in the positive atmosphere that the Action Plan would have
been implemented effectively and comprehensively. In the face of a number of
challenges, it is crucial to reaffirm our commitment to the continued role of the NPT
as the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful
use of nuclear energy. It is also equally important to reiterate that these three pillars
of the global regime of nuclear issues must be implemented in a balanced and
comprehensive manner. 
4. International efforts to this end should include, first and foremost, those by
nuclear weapons states to fulfill their obligation under Article VI of the NPT and the
13 practical steps towards nuclear disarmament. Progress also should be made in the
initiation of negotiation of internationally binding arrangements on assuring security
for non-nuclear weapons states (negative security assurances) and negotiation of a
fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT).
5. While looking forward to the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty (CTBT), we should also allocate adequate investment to the role of
nuclear-weapons-free zones. In this regard, any further failure to convene, as soon as
possible, the Conference on a Middle East Zone free of Nuclear Weapons and other
types of WMDs would call into question, in a serious manner, the credibility of the
NPT as well as commitment by key players to the establishment of such a zone in a
region already fraught with tension. We also call on NWSs to continue engagement
with ASEAN Member States with a view to acceding, as soon as possible, to the
Protocol to the Treaty of Southeast Asian Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons.
6. Challenges to nuclear proliferation should be addressed in a comprehensive
and prudent manner. While sharing the view that relevant international obligations
should be fulfilled, we are also of the view that diplomacy and peaceful settlement
of disputes, whenever and wherever possible, should be given a chance, in which
legitimate interests of parties concerned must be taken in account, including the
right to peaceful use of nuclear energy. It is also critical to revitalize the
disarmament machinery, including the Conference on Disarmament and the
Disarmament Commission, with continued use of basic principles and practices, as
consensually agreed at the First Special Session of the General Assembly on
disannament.
7. Successes have been proved feasible in areas related to the implementation
of the 2010 Action Plan. The first ever High-Level Meeting of the UN General
Assembly devoted solely to nuclear disarmament held in Septep1ber 2013, its GA
Follow-up resolution, as well as the recent Nuclear Security Summits and its
outcomes are cases in point. Successes are also visible in the multifaceted technical
cooperation between the International Atomic Energy Agency and a number of
States Parties to the NPT, including developing countries. In this regard, we highly
commend the role and the efforts by the IAEA in ensuring nuclear safety and
security and in the promotion of peaceful use of nuclear energy in general.
Mr. Chairman,
8. Viet N am is strongly committed to international efforts towards general
and complete disarmament, to the role of the NPT as well as to fulfilling the
·responsibilities under the Treaty, including the 2010 Action Plan. Since the last
Review Conference, we have taken steps to strengthen our adherence to relevant
international instruments in this regard, including the ratification of the Additional
Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement in September 2012, the accession to the
Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and the 
ratification of its Amendment in October 2012, participation in the Joint Convention
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and the Safety of Radioactive Source
Management in September 2013. VietNam is now preparing for the ratification of
the International Convention on the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
9. VietNam also made efforts to realize our commitment by practical steps.
Viet Nam has continuously been working to strengthen its legal and regulatory
framework for nuclear safety, security and safeguards to conform to the latest IAEA
Nuclear Security Series. We successfully implemented core conversion from HEU
to LEU fuel at Da Lat Research Reactor in 2011 and had all spent HEU fuels
repatriated to the Russian Federation in July 2013. We have also maintained close
cooperation with international partners on nuclear security and safety. Recently, in
February 2014, VietNam, the Republic of Korea and the IAEA signed the "Letter of
Intent" to implement a Pilot Project for Radioactive Source Location Tracking
System (RADLOT) in Viet Nam, contributing to the security of radioactive sources
used for NDT. In its development of first nuclear power plants, Viet Nam has
cooperated closely with the IAEA to ensure full compliance with relevant standards
adopted by the Agency. As a member of the IAEA Board of Governors (2013-2015)
and the Chair of the Board of Governors (2013-2014), VietNam has contributed to
the promotion of the work of the Agency as well as its role in international
cooperation.
Mr. President,
10. In conclusion, let me reiterate VietNam's commitment and willingness to
work with states for a successful outcome of this important Session of the PrepCom.
In doing so, in the face of numerous challenges, it is in our collective interests that
states parties reaffirm their political commitment to the Action Plan and translate
into concrete steps, in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
I thank you./. 