
Mr. Chairman,
Since it's the first time for my delegation to address this PrepCom meeting, allow me to congratulate you on your election as chair of this meeting and assure you of my delegation's full support. I also thank you for your leadership during the informal consultation with a view to reaching consensus on the adoption of the agenda.
My delegation avails itself of this opportunity to thank the distinguished Ambassadors of South Africa for his proposal and Islamic Republic of Iran for his flexibility.
Mr. Chairman,
Afghanistan attaches great importance to the role of the NPT as one of the fundamental toofdbr ensuring peace and security across the globe since its adoption in 1968. My country ratified the treaty in 1970 and both its Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement and Model Additional Protocol that are already enforced.
My country believes that through constructive and dedicated discussion of three pillars of the NPT mainly disarmament, non proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. the review process will fulfill its responsibility towards addressing current challenges and strengthening confidence among member countries.
Afghanistan is also of the view that according to the paragraph III of Article VIM of die NPT. it's the mandate of review conferences to consider existing challenges, and through transparent discussion, undertake substantial and necessary decisions towards full implementation of the treaty.
Unfortunately, to day we see that NPT is not fully implemented. Due to the non compliance of member states to the treaty in one hand and lack of universality of the treat) on the other hand, the disarmament and non proliferation activities have still remained the main challenges.
As its principle possession, Afghanistan denounces all kind of weapons of mass destruction including Nuclear Weapons and strongly support disarmament, Nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
My delegation emphasizes on the importance of the implementation of all the previous General Conferences resolutions on safeguards and verification including in the Middle East and also recalls the implementation of the decisions adopted in 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences.
Afghanistan places great importance on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as inalienable rights of Member States for sustainable development, with a view that all nuclear activities art-undertaken with full compliance to the IAEA safeguards regime.
My country welcomes and supports the establishment of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones (NWFZ) in several regions particularly in Central Asia and South East Asia and notes that such initiatives not only reflect the commitment of the Member States to the regional and international instruments, but also open the way towards denuclearization and global disarmament.
My country would avail any opportunity to join such agreements and request other states to establish such multilateral mechanisms within their respective region in particular in other pans of Asia and the Middle East, In this line Afghanistan would also like to encourage Nuclear Weapon States to take steps towards the implementation of their obligation:- mime with NPT provisions and to provide necessary assurances to these zones and other non nuclear member states.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation supports dialogue and diplomacy to solve any issues regarding nuclear verification and urges all parties to undertake transparent and confidence building measures on their nuclear activities.
My delegation wishes successful conclusion for this meeting.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.