Mr. Chairman,
[Let me at the outset congratulate you to the assumption of your high post in this Conference and assure you of my delegation's full support in your difficult task.
My delegation fully aligns with the statement held by Luxemburg on behalf of the European Union. I shall therefore limit myself to those items to which Austria attaches particular importance. These can be found in the areas of safeguards, physical protection and export controls.
Let me in this context also refer to proposals and draft language tabled by a group of countries including Austria, which, like in previous Review Conferences, has attempted to put together thoughts and concepts considered to be capable of achieving agreement by this Conference.]
(Safeguards)
The safeguards system of the NPT has seen several developments over the years since the entry-into-force of the Treaty and the adoption of the first model NPT safeguards agreement, the so called "comprehensive safeguards agreement", (in 1971, issued as IAEA document INFCIRC/153). The comprehensive safeguards agreement was for a long time the standard for meeting the requirements of Art. 111.1 the NPT, and it was perceived as meeting the Treaty's security requirements.
In the early 1990ies, however, we were harshly confronted with the fact that the system as it stood did not provide the IAEA with the tools required to detect clandestine nuclear activities in a country. Therefore additional requirements were elaborated to bring the NPT safeguards system to the standard we considered necessary to meet our concerns. The most outstanding result of this strengthening exercise was the adoption of the Model AP by the IAEA Board of Governors in 1997, an instrument that was needed to give the Agency the legal authority required to implement one part of the additional verification measures.
The last NPT Review Conference, welcomed the Model AP clearly as a result of the safeguards strengthening exercise called for in paragraph 11 of the 1995 Decision 2 on Principles and Objectives ("IAEA safeguards system should be regularly assessed and evaluated, decisions adopted by the IAEA Board of Governors aimed at further strengthening the effectiveness of Agency safeguards should be supported and implemented and the Agency's capability to detect undeclared nuclear activities should be increased"). It called on the NPT parties to support and implement these strengthening measures, stating that the original framework of comprehensive safeguards had provided only a "limited level of assurance" and that the measures in the AP were necessary to complement the safeguards capability of the IAEA.
This leaves no doubt that there is only one safeguards system for NPT purposes, which has been established in line with Art. 111.1 of the Treaty and which is a dynamic, living system that has to be improved whenever there is a need to do so. The AP is an integral part of this safeguards system. From Art. 111.1 derives the responsibility of States parties to do the necessary to enable the Agency to implement the system in its current state of the art.
Strictly following this rationale, Austria holds the legal position that Art. 111.1 of the Treaty contains the obligation for all NNWS parties to the NPT to adapt their safeguards agreements with the IAEA to be consistent with the current safeguards system for NPT purposes. This cannot be done over night, but eight years after the adoption of the Model AP it can be expected that States enter into negotiations with the IAEA on an AP as a matter of urgency, and with the aim of putting into force such an instrument as soon as possible.
Recent revelations about nuclear supply routes have shown that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. The IAEA strengthened safeguards system is depending upon universality.
(Physical Protection)
In the field of physical protection we note very positive developments in the international legal regime. In May last year the Austrian Foreign Minister, on behalf of 25 countries, submitted an amendment proposal to the depositary of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM). The proposal, which is based on the outcome of the deliberations of the Open-Ended Group of Legal and Technical Experts convened by the Director General of the IAEA, has been circulated to all States Parties and enjoys broad support. A Diplomatic Conference for its consideration and adoption will take place from 4 to 8 July this year in Vienna.
We call on all States parties to this Convention to participate in this Conference, bearing in mind that the adoption of any amendment needs the consent of two thirds of the contracting parties.
(Export Controls)
Nuclear export controls were for a long time a source of misperceptions. The 1995 Review and Extension Conference achieved a decisive break-through when it agreed on paragraph 12 of Decision 2, making "full-scope safeguards" the condition for nuclear supplies. The 2000 Review Conference reaffirmed this standard.
In the meantime this standard has evolved further. The AP now constitutes the verification standard according to Art. 111.1 of the Treaty. As Art. III.2, the export control provision, refers to exactly the same safeguards standard as required by Art. 111.1, this Conference should agree to make AP a condition for nuclear supply.
This is the 1st NPT Conference without Dr. Fritz Schmidt, who was, inter alia, the director of my division and Chairman of the Zangger Committee for nearly twelve years. His passing away in February this year has left a void that cannot be filled.
The Zangger Committee, also known as the NPT Exporters Committee, is an informal, technical group of countries regularly involved in nuclear trade, which deals as a facilitator with the interpretation of the export control provisions of Art. 111.2 of the Treaty. This interpretation, published in IAEA document INFCIRC 209 and amended from time to time, has gained wide acceptance over the years. The work of the Committee has been well recognized and welcomed in NPT Review Conferences, and States parties have been urged to base their export control policies on the Committee's interpretations. My delegation hopes that the important work of the Zangger Committee will again be recognized and confirmed by this Conference.
The Zangger Committee has launched a website and a programme for "outreach activities" with interested countries that in the past sometimes considered themselves in a pointed form as "victims" of export controls. This outreach programme is aimed at creating an on-going dialogue of equal partners based on the understanding of a common responsibility.
Previous Conferences have requested the Zangger Committee to review its Understandings from time to time in order to bring them in line with technological and other developments. Austria takes note with particular appreciation of the work undertaken by the Committee in this respect and referred to in an information document submitted to this conference by the Committee as document NPT/CONF.2005/WP.14. We hope that the Committee will adopt a revised set of Understandings soon. It should take account of recommendations already given by the NPT sovereign in past review conferences, and I am sure that the Committee, as the faithful interpreter of the NPT's export control requirements, will take into account any recommendations from this Conference in its further deliberations. I am specifically referring to the Additional Protocol as a condition of supply as well as physical protection as part of a "state system of nuclear security" as outlined in our Working papers.
Mr. Chairman,
In concluding I wish to assure you once more that Austria will continue to contribute constructively to a successful outcome of this Committee.
