2013 session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster II Statement by Ambassador Peter Woolcott
Australian Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Geneva
and Ambassador for Disarmament
29 April 2013
Mr Chairman,
Any State that pursues nuclear weapons increases proliferation pressures within a
region, and undermines the global non-proliferation architecture.
Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and their related technology and
knowledge is therefore the responsibility of all States parties – both nuclear-weapon
and non-nuclear-weapon.
The NPT is the cornerstone of the global fight against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. But its success depends on States parties’ taking practical steps in
accordance with their obligations and commitments. The 2010 Action Plan outlines
key steps all States parties can take in support of non-proliferation, and we urge all
States parties to work together and make every effort to implement the Action Plan,
including in furtherance of their own security interests.
Mr Chairman
Australia has been a strong supporter of the International Atomic Energy Agency
since its inception in 1957. The IAEA safeguards system provides an invaluable
service to the NPT and the international community. It provides a practical means by
which non-nuclear-weapon States can demonstrate their commitment to use nuclear
energy exclusively for peaceful purposes, while providing assurance that others are
doing the same. The assurance the safeguards system delivers is not only essential to
preventing nuclear proliferation, but also fundamental to nuclear trade and
cooperation and an important factor in continuing progress on nuclear disarmament.
Consistent with Actions 25 and 28, Australia calls on all States yet to conclude a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol with the IAEA to do
so without delay.
Through the ten-nation NPDI, Australia has continued its strong advocacy on the
Additional Protocol and modified Small Quantities Protocol. In line with Action 29,

we have conducted outreach to a number of States yet to conclude an AP and stand
ready to assist those States to implement an AP if requested.
In support of Action 30, the NPDI has also submitted a joint working paper on
promoting the wider application of IAEA safeguards in the nuclear-weapon States.
Mr Chairman
Export controls play a crucial role in implementing nuclear non-proliferation
obligations under NPT article III, paragraph 2. Through membership of the NPDI and
Vienna Group of Ten, and in support of Action 35, Australia has contributed to two
working papers on export controls submitted to this year’s PrepCom.
Australia continues to urge all States to establish, develop, review and maintain
appropriate effective national export controls over both nuclear and nuclear-related
dual-use items and technology. Export control regimes based on the multilaterally
negotiated and agreed guidelines and understandings of the Nuclear Suppliers Group
(NSG) and Zangger Committee provide the most effective means of fulfilling a
State’s non-proliferation responsibilities and obligations, while ensuring that the
international community can maintain confidence that the trade in nuclear technology
and knowledge is exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Mr Chairman
Australia also recognises the need to ensure that relevant export control guidelines
keep pace with technological and other developments. As part of these efforts and
consistent with Australia’s position as a member of the NSG, Australia – recognising
the decision taken in September 2008 to grant India an exemption to the full scope
safeguards requirement in the NSG’s export control guidelines – welcomes India’s
engagement with the main export control regimes. Compliance with IAEA safeguards
is a prerequisite for the supply of Australian uranium to any country and ensures that
Australia’s uranium supply is only ever used for peaceful purposes. Australia
continues to abide by NSG rules and to meet its international obligations as a nuclear
supplier in accordance with Action 35.
Mr Chairman
Australia is a long-standing supporter of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones (NWFZ). Such
zones play an important role in strengthening the non-proliferation and disarmament
regime by establishing regions in which the manufacture, acquisition, possession,
stationing and testing of nuclear weapons is prohibited.
In concert with the NPDI, Australia urges nuclear-weapon States to take all necessary
measures to bring into force the pending Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaties
Protocols. In an effort to further Actions 7-9 of the Action Plan, the NPDI has
submitted a joint working paper on Nuclear Weapon Free Zones and Negative
Security Assurances (NSAs), stressing the importance non-nuclear-weapon States
place on Nuclear Weapon Free Zones and NSAs. While the only absolute guarantee
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is their total elimination, the NPDI
paper highlights that non-nuclear weapon States have a legitimate interest in receiving

unequivocal, legally binding security assurances from nuclear-weapon States not to
use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against them.
Australia regrets that a conference on the establishment of a Middle-East Weapons of
Mass Destruction Free Zone has not yet been convened. We strongly support its
earliest possible convening. We fully support the Facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko
Laajava of Finland, in his ongoing efforts and look forward to his report to this
PrepCom session. It is vital that all States in the region engage in a spirit of genuine
and constructive cooperation as they work towards this important goal.
Mr Chairman,
Compliance with IAEA safeguards obligations is imperative to preserve the integrity
of the safeguards system and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
related technology. Australia continues to view, with deep concern, Iran’s ongoing
non-compliance with IAEA Resolutions and the legitimate demands of the UN
Security Council. We call on Iran to engage with the IAEA in good faith in the
examination of any outstanding or contentious issues to help give the international
community assurances of the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear activities. We continue
to hope for a successful conclusion of the two distinct sets of negotiations, both with
the IAEA and between Iran and the E3+3.
Australia is also deeply troubled by the recent actions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We condemned DPRK’s third nuclear test on 12 February and its
rocket launch on 12 December last year which violated UN Security Council
Resolutions 1718, 1874 and (in the case of the 12 February test) 2087. These acts
challenge the disarmament and non-proliferation regime and contravene the
international norm established by the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
We are deeply concerned by reports DPRK may be considering testing an
intermediate-range ballistic missile and conducting a further nuclear test. Such actions
would further escalate tensions and lead to DPRK’s increased isolation. We should all
recall that the 2010 consensus Action Plan included a call for DPRK’s complete and
verifiable abandonment of all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs. So no
State Party should be silent on this matter – we should all be speaking with one voice.
Australia calls on DPRK to abandon its current path, cease its provocations and abide
by its international commitments, including UN Security Council Resolutions.
Mr Chairman
Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons is in the interests of all States and
should be pursued with vigour and determination. As we build to the 2015 RevCon,
Australia is determined to see the NPT continue to move forward in preventing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Full implementation of the 2010 Action Plan is
central to these efforts.
I thank you, Mr Chairman.

