2018 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference
April 23 – May 4, 2018 in Geneva
Cluster II
Statement Austria

Mr. Chairman,
On cluster two, Austria aligns herself with the statement of the European Union. From
the national point of view, I would like to make the following additional remarks.
Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons figures prominently in the current programme of
work of the Austrian government. We see the prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons not only as an obligation under the NPT, but also as a national foreign
policy priority. In line with this approach, we have an additional protocol with the IAEA in
place. Austria takes its export control commitments very seriously also with regard to
ballistic missiles. We provide the secretariat for the Hague Code of Conduct against the
proliferation of ballistic missiles. A couple of years ago, Austria contributed significantly
to bringing about the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material. We are careful to implement faithfully UNSC Resolution 1540 aiming at
denying non-State actors access to nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction. We
believe that the NPT States Parties should jointly call on all States to accede to relevant
legal instruments, or align their policies with them, as the case may be.
Mr. Chairman,
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) agreed in Vienna in 2015 has been the
most significant success in nuclear non-proliferation in recent years. Continued full
implementation by all States concerned is essential and will facilitate addressing further
issues of concern not object to the agreement proper. Furthermore, the JCPOA is
significant not only as a solution to a specific country situation. More broadly, the
agreement exemplifies that the approach of effective multilateralism with dialogue and
negotiations at its centre actually brings results. Following through on the JCPOA
therefore will enhance our chances to resolve other proliferation challenges, while
abandoning it would diminish our ability to achieve results on those other fronts. The
1

issues that come to mind are the establishment of a weapons of mass destruction free
zone in the Middle East which my country supports, and in particular the termination of
the nuclear and ballistic missile programme of the DPRK. On this latter issue, we
welcome recent positive developments and announcements, bearing in mind that of
course, as is also the case with the WMDFZME, real tangible progress has yet to be
achieved.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria supports the rigorous implementation and continuous improvement of the
international non-proliferation framework. This is essential to prevent the spread of
nuclear weapons to additional States or possibly other actors. It is very difficult to
prevent a country from acquiring the bomb if there is a real determination. So
suppression of supply is not enough, we have to look at the root causes why a country
might seek nuclear weapons. There is a belief, misguided in Austria’s view, that the
possession of nuclear weapons enhances national security. It is unfortunate that nuclear
weapon States continue to profess this view themselves and thereby contribute to
making nuclear weapons appear attractive to others. This is one of the reasons why NPT
States Parties should engage in a discussion about the security implications of nuclear
weapons which would take due account of the fact that nuclear weapons represent a
grave threat to security, including for the nuclear weapons possessors themselves. Let
me draw delegates’ attention to a working paper Austria has submitted to this
Conference intended to stimulate this discussion.
Mr. Chairman,
To conclude, Austria believes that the international non-proliferation efforts with the
NPT at the centre have to be further strengthened. Restraining action continues to be
necessary. But its effectiveness remains limited unless we fundamentally change our
collective attitude to nuclear weapons. A majority of States today has already achieved
this shift in consciousness. They are immune to proliferation because they have
understood that they will always be better off in terms of their security without nuclear
weapons no matter in whose hands. To further disseminate this view is the single most
effective contribution to non-proliferation.
I thank you.
2

