AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA
Australian Mission to the United Nations

E-mail australia@un.int

nd

150 East 42 Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.AustraliaUN.org

Third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Cluster II Statement by Mr Ian McConville, Australian Permanent Mission to
the United Nations, Geneva
1 May 2014

Mr Chairman,
A state pursuing nuclear weapons increases proliferation pressures within a region, and
undermines the global non-proliferation architecture. Australia is a firm believer in the
importance of the NPT as the cornerstone of the global effort to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. It is for this reason that we must all work together both at this
PrepCom, and to achieve a good outcome at the 2015 NPT Review Conference, to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, goods and technology.
But to achieve this depends on States taking practical steps in accordance with their
obligations and commitments. The 2010 NPT Action Plan outlines key steps all States
can take in support of non-proliferation. We urge all States to work together and make
every effort to implement the Action Plan. In this regard we encourage all States to
complete and present their annual national reporting plans – Australia has submitted its
reporting plan against the 64 points of the 2010 Action Plan, and we expect this
document to be up on the Paper Smart portal soon.
Mr Chairman,
Australia has been a strong supporter of the International Atomic Energy Agency since
its inception in 1957. The IAEA safeguards system provides an invaluable service to
NPT State Parties and the international community.
Consistent with Actions 25 and 28, Australia calls on all States yet to conclude a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol with the IAEA to do so
without delay.
Through the twelve-nation NPDI, Australia has continued its strong advocacy for the
Additional Protocol and modified Small Quantities Protocol. In line with Action 29, we

-2have conducted outreach to a number of States yet to conclude an AP and stand ready to
assist those States to implement an AP, if requested.
Mr Chairman,
Export controls play a crucial role in implementing nuclear non-proliferation obligations
under NPT article III, paragraph 2. Through membership of the NPDI and Vienna Group
of Ten, and in support of 2010 NPT Action Plan item 35, Australia has contributed to a
Working Paper on Vienna Issues for the 2014 PrepCom, covering, inter alia, compliance
and verification.
Australia continues to urge all States to establish, develop, review and maintain
appropriate, effective national export controls over nuclear and nuclear-related dual-use
items and technology. Export control regimes, based on multilaterally negotiated and
agreed guidelines and understandings of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and
Zangger Committee, provide the most effective means of fulfilling a State’s nonproliferation responsibilities and obligations, while ensuring that the international
community can maintain confidence that the trade in nuclear technology and knowledge
is exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Mr Chairman,
Australia also recognises the need to ensure that relevant export control guidelines keep
pace with technological and other developments. Therefore, following the NSG decision
of September 2008 to grant India an exemption to the full scope safeguards requirement
in the NSG’s export control guidelines, Australia welcomes India’s engagement with the
main export control regimes. Compliance with IAEA safeguards is a prerequisite for the
supply of Australian uranium to any country and ensures that Australia’s uranium supply
is only ever used for peaceful purposes. Australia continues to abide by NSG rules and to
meet its international obligations as a nuclear supplier in accordance with Action 35.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear Weapon Free Zones (NWFZs) play an important role in strengthening the nonproliferation and disarmament regime by establishing regions in which the manufacture,
acquisition, possession, stationing and testing of nuclear weapons is prohibited.
As a long-standing supporter of NWFZs, Australia strongly supports the early convening
of a conference on the establishment of a Middle-East Weapons of Mass Destruction Free
Zone. We fully support the Facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko Laajava of Finland, in his
ongoing efforts and are encouraged by the recent progress at meetings at Glion,
Switzerland. Australia calls upon all States in the region to engage in a spirit of genuine
and constructive cooperation as they work towards this important goal.
Mr Chairman,
Compliance with IAEA safeguards obligations is imperative to preserve the integrity of
the safeguards system and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and related
technology. Australia hopes that the continuing negotiations between the EU3+3 with

-3Iran under the Joint Plan of Action will lead to the final and comprehensive resolution of
Iran’s nuclear issue. We urge Iran to swiftly and steadily implement measures such as the
ratification and implementation of an Additional Protocol, to remove international
concerns regarding its nuclear activities. We urge Iran to observe the requirement of the
relevant UN Security Council resolutions and decisions by the IAEA Board of
Governors. We fully support the efforts by the EU3 + 3 as well as the IAEA, including
the IAEA’s efforts to resolve issues regarding the Possible Military Dimensions of Iran’s
nuclear program. We call upon Iran to fully cooperate with the IAEA in this respect.
We strongly condemn North Korea’s nuclear, ballistic missile and proliferation programs
which undermine the global non-proliferation regime. These programs pose an
increasing threat to the stability of our own region, and to international peace and
security. We condemn North Korea’s recent rocket launches, particularly those which
breached UN Security Council resolutions by using ballistic technology. We deplore
efforts by North Korea to restart and expand nuclear facilities at Yongbyon and urge
North Korea to cease all nuclear activities immediately. We strongly urge North Korea to
comply with its commitments under the 2005 Six-Party Talks Joint Statement and under
UN Security Council Resolutions to denuclearise and return to the NPT and IAEA
safeguards. We urge North Korea to refrain from further provocations including missile
launches, nuclear tests and threats of the use of nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons is in the interests of all States and should
be pursued with vigour and determination. It is telling that in the 43 years of the NPT’s
existence, there is only one example of the proliferation of nuclear weapons by an NPT
member State. This stands in contrast to the situation prior to the NPT’s establishment,
when there were serious concerns that many States would choose to obtain nuclear
weapons. But even one new State with nuclear weapons is too many. As we build
momentum towards the 2015 Review Conference, Australia is determined to strengthen
the NPT to prevent any further proliferation of nuclear weapons. Full implementation of
the 2010 NPT Action Plan is central to these efforts.
I thank you, Mr Chairman.

