NON-PROLIFERATION
Mr Chairman,
The Brazilian Constitution expressly forbids all non-peecefui nuclear activities. It effectively outlaws all activities involving nuclear weapons,, which are prohibited within the national territory, in line wstn Brazil's commitments and obligations under the NPT.
Brazil does not possess - nor has it ever developed - nuclear weapons anci has always fulfilled its nuclear non-proliferation commitments, legislation in force prohibits and prevents the testing, use, manufacture, procuction or acquisition by any means of any nuclear explosive device n its territory. Furthermore, we are not a party to any strategic alliance or security system that contemplates the possibility of using nuclear weapons.
Brazil shares the concerns about the risk that weapons of mass destruction and related technologies may fall into the hands of non-state actors or terrorists. Such risk only strengthens the need to work towards complete, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament. The need to curb proliferation should not in any way justify the indefinite retention of nuclear weapons by any State, or hamper either the economic anc technological development of the Parties or international cooperation m the field of peaceful nuclear activities.
The concern about proliferation outside the Treaty is legitimate Complacency with proliferation outside the NPT is inconsistent with efforts to strengthen the Treaty's regime and may defeat the purpose of eliminating nuclear weapons The goal of universality must be stressed in this regard, Brazil believes that universal adherence to the NPT is central to the maintenance anc enhancement of international peace and stability. To realize this objective, Brazil continues to call on States remaining outside the Treaty to accede to it ss non_nuclccs' weapon States, promptly and without condition.
Mr Chairman,
The existing IAEA's safeguard system provides the international community with credible assurance of non-diversion of nuclear material from declared activities. All States Parties should bring into force comprehensive safeguard agreements with the Agency, as mandated by the NPT itself,
Additionally, State Parties should, at the national level and m accordance w;tr national legislations and international commitments, strengthen and implement effective national export controls and bring into force the highest possible standards of security and physical protection of nuclear materials.
Clandestine nuclear military programs and information about unreported nuclear activities warn the international community of the risk of nuclear weapons o; associated technologies falling in the hands of non-state actors Tht international community has a collective responsibility to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Every nation holds high stakes m tf>: strengthening of the non-proliferation regime.