Brazil is concerned about cases of nuclear proliferation, both within and outside the Treaty, and shares the perception that actions are required to address this threat. The revelation of clandestine nuclear military programs and information about unreported nuclear activities warn us of the risk of nuclear weapons or associated technologies falling in the hands of non-state actors.
Such situations entail new challenges and also stress the importance of full and strict compliance by members with all the provisions of the Treaty and IAEA safeguard agreements, and the need for renewed efforts towards the universalization of the NPT. Both compliance and universalization are essential for the strengthening of the Treaty.
Mr Chairman,
The Brazilian Constitution expressly forbids all non-peaceful nuclear activities. It effectively outlaws all activities involving nuclear weapons, which are prohibited within the national territory, in .line with Brazil's commitments and obligations under the NPT.
Brazii does "not possess - nor has ever developed - nuclear weapons and nuclear non-proliferation commitments. Legislation in
acquisition by any means of any nuclear explosive device in its territory. Furthermore, we are not a party to any strategic alliance or security system that contemplates the possibility of using nuclear weapons.
Brazil shares the concerns about the risk that weapons of mass destruction and related technologies may fall into the hands of non-state actors or terrorists. Such risk only strengthens the need to work towards complete, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament. The need to curb proliferation should not in any way justify the indefinite retention of nuclear weapons by any State, or hamper either the economic and technological development of the Parties or international cooperation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities.
Mr Chairman,
The existing IAEA's safeguard system provides the international community with credible assurance of non-diversion of nuclear material from declared activities. All States Parties should bring into force comprehensive safeguard agreements with the Agency, as mandated by the NPT itself. Additionally, State Parties should, at the national level and in accordance with national legislations and international commitments, strengthen and implement effective national export controls and bring into force the highest possible standards of security and physical protection of nuclear materials.
We have a collective responsibility to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons and to remove the threat it represents is a collective responsibility. Every nation holds high stakes in the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. Efforts at national, sub-regional, regional and plurilateral levels contribute to that end, but should be seen as complementary measures to a jrodder ind nuitildterai acoroacn to the juestions of ■ion-proliferation.