Mr, Chairman,
Brazil shares the concerns of the international community about cases of nuclear proliferation, both within and outside the Treaty, and about the risk that weapons of mass destruction and related technologies may fall into the hands of non-state actors. This risk only strengthens the need to take action towards complete, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament. The need to contain proliferation, however, should not in any way justify the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons by any State, or hinder the inalienable right of States to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, under Article IV of the Treaty.
On the other hand, the concern about proliferation outside the Treaty is also legitimate. Brazil believes in this regard that universal adherence to the NPT is paramount to the maintenance and enhancement of international peace and security.
Mr. Chairman,
The existing IAEA's comprehensive safeguards mechanism provides credible assurance of non-diversion of nuclear material from declared activities and Brazil defends that all States Parties should bring into force comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency, as established in the NPT. However, when one listen to the debate on the issue of proliferation inside the Treaty one may be led to think that the safeguards applied by the AIEA are not effective. It must be said that there is not one single recorded instance in which an enrichment facility under IAEA safeguards was used for proscribed purposes and there is not one single case in which nuclear material has been illegally diverted from a safeguarded enrichment plant.
Mr. Chairman,
The difficulties and challenges facing the international community in the implementation of the NPT do not derive, as many of its critics suggest, of a supposedly inadequacy of the Treaty to today's global environment. It derives from the unbalance in the implementation of ail its obligations by the different actors. The international community has a collective responsibility both to disarm and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We all have only to benefit from the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime.
I thank you.