Cluster 2 – specific issue
WMDFZ on the Middle East:
Brazil regrets that the Conference on Establishing a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in
the Middle East, mandated by the 2010 RevCon, has not yet taken place and
reiterates its view that this is a central commitment within the package of decisions
by States Parties in 1995 that made possible the indefinite extension of the NPT.
The Resolution on the Middle East of 1995, as agreed in 2010, remains valid until
its goals and objectives are achieved.
Progress towards the establishment of the Zone would redress a major
implementation deficit of the NPT and is an indispensable measure for restoring
the credibility of consensus decisions and review cycles within the framework of
the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime of which the NPT serves as
the cornerstone.
The Conference on a ME-NWFZ should be open-ended and without preconditions.
Proposals which subject arrangements for the Conference to a broader agenda will
serve only to effectively block progress towards an agreed and long overdue
objective of States Parties under the NPT.
The Tlatelolco Treaty which established Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction made allowance
for the progressive adherence of States Parties to treaty obligations. This flexible
mechanism could serve as a model for the Middle East that takes into account
different national readiness time-frames for adherence.

Cluster 2:
IAEA Safeguards:
Brazil's commitment to nuclear non-proliferation is ironclad. Nuclear weapons have been
proscribed in our Constitution; we have joined both the Tlatelolco Treaty, which established
the Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zone in Latin America and the Caribean, and the NonProliferation Treaty. Brazil was also among the first States to sign and ratify the CTBT, and
we are proud to have been the first country to sign the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons.
Brazil's nuclear program is subject to a double layer of safeguards, in line with the fourparty agreement between Brazil, Argentina, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting
and Control - ABACC, and the IAEA. ABACC's institutional design has long been recognized
as an innovative and effective approach towards nuclear safeguarding, confidence building
and multi-party cooperation.
Additional Protocol:
As unequivocally stated in the Outcome Document of the 2010 RevCon, the conclusion of an
Additional Protocol is the country's sovereign decision and voluntary in nature. Brazil recalls
that the Additional Protocol does not establish a safeguards standard under the NPT. For
countries that belong to NWFZ, that are committed to the NPT’s comprehensive safeguards
and to additional layers of non-proliferation obligations and systems of verification and
accountability, the AP is unnecessary. Universalization of safeguards, in our view, requires
bringing all programs for nuclear weapons under legally enforceable and time-bound
obligations establishing their verifiable and irreversible elimination, including the elimination
of existing stocks of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other explosive devises. This is
why we have supported and singed the TPNW. It is our unequivocal commitment to a world
free of nuclear weapons. We hope all countries serious about nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation can follow suit.
Make no mistake, it is the continued existence of nuclear weapons and the deteriorated
security conditions resulting from the unabashed resumption of a nuclear arms race
amongst the NWS, that are the greatest threat to the NPT regime and to international
peace and security. As are the heightened tensions caused by nuclear brinkmanship on the
par of countries possessing nuclear weapons.
Non-proliferation is an issue of the utmost importance, but it cannot be a smokescreen for
those who are consistently at fault with their disarmament obligations, thereby undermining
the regime as a whole.
The best way to advance non-proliferation is to move ahead with nuclear disarmament and
the elimination of nuclear arsenals. As stated in the 2010 Action Plan, APs should be
universally applied when the complete elimination of nuclear weapons has been achieved.
DPRK:
Brazil is encouraged by the positive signs regarding the Korean peninsula and hopes that
the renewed push for dialogue will lead to denuclearization. We welcome the decision of the
DPRK to stop nuclear and ballistic missile tests and urge the North Korean government to
fully comply with relevant UNSC resolutions, to return to the NPT regime and to sign and
ratify the CTBT.
JCPOA:
Brazil has always supported diplomatic means and efforts to addressing the Iranian nuclear
program with a view to assuring its exclusively peaceful nature. We have hailed the JCPOA
as a breaktrough and have followed its adoption by the UNSC and its implementation with
satisfaction, noting compliance of its terms by Iran has been repeatedly certified by the
IAEA. In a context of increasing instability in the Middle East and heightening tensions
worldwide, the JCPOA is the successful expression of a collective effort and must be
preserved.
A possible denunciation of the JCPOA would have a destabilizing effect on the Middle East
affecting both the credibility of the UNSC and the IAEA, weakening multilateralism as a tool
to effectively solve conflicts. It would also bode ill to the current discussions on the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, fostering uncertainty and therefore mistrust on
possible legal arrangements.



