

Mr Chairman,
NPT Article III requires States Parties’ full compliance with their NPT Safeguards Agreement obligations, as
administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency. Canada urges States Parties to consider how we
can collectively ensure the return to NPT Article III compliance by Iran and North Korea.
Iran often claims that the numerous resolutions brought against it by the IAEA Board of Governors and UN
Security Council stem from a desire to prevent Iran from having access to nuclear energy, thereby
undermining NPT Article IV. However, these same resolutions explicitly permit the development of a
peaceful nuclear power program in Iran, including the international project to build and operate the
Bushehr reactor. Meanwhile, Iran continues to flaunt the binding requirement imposed by these resolutions
that it take steps toward the full implementation of its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and other
related obligations, including implementation of an Additional Protocol.
Canada shares the international community’s serious concerns about the scope and nature of Iran’s nuclear
program and Tehran’s ongoing failure to meet its safeguards obligations. Iran has lost the confidence of the
IAEA Board of Governors and the UN Security Council through its long history of concealing nuclear
activities. In light of this track record and Iran’s failure to provide any plausible justification that could
relate to peaceful purposes for its efforts to acquire the full nuclear fuel cycle, Canada fully supports the
nine UN Security Council Resolutions and twelve IAEA Board of Governors Resolutions adopted to address
Iran’s nuclear activities. These resolutions express the international community’s desire for a negotiated
diplomatic solution which respects Iran’s right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while ensuring the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear program.
While Canada notes the IAEA’s confirmation that Iran has so far implemented all of its required actions
under the November 2013 Joint Plan of Action – including suspension of uranium enrichment above 5% U235 and downblending its stock of 20%-enriched uranium – this agreement is only a short-term measure
intended to facilitate a comprehensive solution. Canada firmly believes that any such comprehensive
solution will require that all outstanding issues be resolved. Notably, Iran continues to be the only State
with a CSA in force that refuses to implement the modified Code 3.1 provisions of its Subsidiary
Arrangements, in violation of that CSA. Iran continues to refuse to provide sufficient information about the
original purpose and chronology of the Fordow Fuel Enrichment plant, as well as a majority of its other
nuclear facilities. As such, the IAEA is not in a position to provide credible assurances about the absence of
undeclared nuclear activities in Iran or to confirm that all nuclear material in Iran is being used for
exclusively peaceful purposes.
Canada has stressed that for Iran to regain its place in the global community it must resolve all noncompliance issues. Chief among these are the possible military dimensions (PMD) of its nuclear research
outlined in the annex to the IAEA Director General’s report of November 2011 (GOV/ 2011/65) – research
which can only be understood in the context of a nuclear weapons development program. Iran has stated
publicly that it would like to resolve all concerns relating to its nuclear program within a year. To achieve
this goal, it seems evident to Canada that Iran will need to accelerate the rate of cooperation with the
Agency under the Framework for Cooperation established in November 2013.

Canada notes that Iran and the IAEA have proceeded to a second round of practical measures under the
Framework and that the first six measures were satisfactorily implemented within the agreed three-month
period. Canada stresses that the Agency must clarify and confirm all information provided by Iran and that
these measures should not be seen as static or fixed requirements, but rather elements in an ongoing process
intended to provide the Agency a complete understanding of Iran’s nuclear program. In this regard, we
expect Iran to cooperate fully and answer all questions posed by the IAEA. Moreover, Iran will need to
include more PMD issues in its future commitments under the Framework. The IAEA Director General has
stated that “much remains to be done to resolve all outstanding issues”. Canada agrees completely. From
our perspective the practical measures agreed to between the Agency and Iran in the next phase of the
Framework will clearly demonstrate the seriousness with which that country views the current process, and
whether or not it truly intends to resolve all outstanding PMD concerns.
Mr Chairman,
The security and stability of Northeast Asia as well as the health of the NPT continue to be threatened by
irresponsible nuclear activities and proliferation by North Korea, notably its third nuclear test in February
2013. We are particularly troubled that North Korea has since been observed restarting the Yongbyon
nuclear complex, conducting activities at its nuclear test site, and carrying out ballistic missile tests. Such
provocative acts do not instil trust or confidence. For its part, Canada has in place robust sanctions against
North Korea and maintains that international sanctions should not be eased before North Korea takes
concrete steps toward denuclearization.
In order to bring peace and stability to the Korean Peninsula, we strongly urge North Korea to re-engage in
the NPT review cycle, to adhere to its Safeguards Agreement and to fully implement all relevant nonproliferation and disarmament obligations – renouncing its nuclear weapons aspirations. The IAEA has an
essential role to play in the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and Canada appreciates the Agency’s
readiness to monitor nuclear activities in North Korea, including uranium enrichment, despite being unable
to implement any safeguards measures there since its inspectors were expelled in 2009. It is deeply
regrettable that a country unable to feed its own people continues to expend so much of its limited
resources on these military programs.
Mr Chairman,
The efficacy and durability of the NPT is predicated on its integrity. Cases of non-compliance that are not
addressed with timely and meaningful action negatively affect the fabric of the Treaty. States Parties must
consider these cases of non-compliance with safeguards obligations and determine how the 2015 RevCon
will address them.
Thank you.


