2017 Preparatory Committee of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee II: Non-Proliferation
Statement by Canada
Mr. Chairman,
The continued integrity of the NPT depends entirely on the ongoing fulfilment of obligations
contained in the Treaty. Pursuant to NPT Article III, non-Nuclear-Weapon States undertake to
conclude a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) applied
on all source or special fissionable materials in all peaceful nuclear activities, and to implement
export controls aimed at preventing diversions to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.
The IAEA plays a unique role in verifying State compliance with their safeguards obligations
under Article III. A Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA), together with an Additional
Protocol (AP), is the current verification standard pursuant to Article III.1. The CSA and AP
together provide the basis for the IAEA to draw an annual conclusion regarding the peaceful
nature of a State’s nuclear program. We urge those States that have yet to sign and ratify an
AP, to do so as soon as possible. We will continue to advocate for the universal adoption of the
AP until that goal is achieved.
Mr. Chairman,
Canada welcomes the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) agreed between the
E3/EU+3 and Iran. Full implementation by Iran of all of its JCPOA commitments combined with
rigorous monitoring and verification by the IAEA, and fulsome reporting by the Agency’s Director
General, will continue to help build the confidence of the international community that Iran’s
nuclear program is exclusively peaceful in nature. Canada strongly supports this essential role
of the IAEA and has contributed $10 million to the IAEA’s verification efforts in Iran since the
beginning of 2014.
Mr. Chairman,
Canada is outraged by the pattern of non-compliance by North Korea and Syria with their nonproliferation obligations.
Canada condemns in the strongest terms the five nuclear tests conducted by North Korea, as
well as the unprecedented number of ballistic missile tests launched by North Korea since the
beginning of 2016, in contravention of successive UNSC resolutions. We are deeply troubled by
North Korea’s continuing efforts to enhance the capabilities of its nuclear weapons program and
ballistic missile delivery systems – efforts which are destabilizing, provocative and illegal.
Canada also deplores North Korea’s relentless proliferation activities abroad, and calls on the
international community to strengthen our collective counter-proliferation efforts. Canada
welcomed, and co-sponsored, United Nations Security Council resolutions 2270 and 2321, and
stands ready to support appropriate measures in response to any further provocations by North
Korea, as well as efforts to forge peaceful multilateral solutions to enhance security in the
region. It is imperative that North Korea resume adherence to the NPT and re-engage in its

review cycle. Canada also urges North Korea to abide by its safeguards and relevant
international obligations.
With regard to Syria, Canada demands that Syria respond to the IAEA’s repeated requests to
resolve that country’s non-compliance with its non-proliferation obligations, in connection with
issues related to the Dair Alzour site and three other related sites. Canada underscores that the
security circumstances in the country do not negate the need for Syria to uphold its safeguards
obligations under the Treaty.
As I mentioned earlier, the efficacy of the NPT is predicated on its integrity. Cases of noncompliance that are not addressed will undermine the Treaty and the global non-proliferation
regime, and make disarmament harder to achieve. Thus, the Preparatory Committee must
reaffirm the fundamental necessity of full compliance with Article III of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
Concerning export controls, Article III.2 of the NPT stipulates that each State Party undertake
not to provide nuclear-related exports to any Non-Nuclear-Weapon State for peaceful purposes,
unless the transfers of source or special fissionable materials are subject to the safeguards
required by Article III.1 of the Treaty. We underline the need for all States Parties to exercise
vigilance in their nuclear export controls.
To this end, Canada continues to value the role that multilateral export-control regimes such as
the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers Group play in facilitating legitimate nuclear
trade among States while respecting non-proliferation commitments.
Finally, as a contributor to the efforts of the “Vienna Group of Ten”, Canada draws attention to
the VG10’s Working Paper on ‘Vienna Issues’ that has been submitted to the Secretariat. We
believe this will make a valuable contribution to this Committee’s deliberations.
Thank you.

