Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster II: Non-Proliferation
Statement by Canada
Mr . Chair,
As we gather to take stock of the status of the NPT, it is important to remind ourselves of what
has been achieved, and that the nuclear non-proliferation regime is robust, effective and on the
right track. However, while there is much to be said about our collective efforts to strengthen
the regime , we must remain vigilant and focused on the challenges ahead .
The non-proliferation obligations set out in the NPT require non-nuclear-weapon states to
conclude a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to
implement export controls aimed at preventing diversion to a nuclear weapons program.
The IAEA plays a unique and fundamental role in verifying State compliance with their
safeguards obligations. Canada believes that a comprehensive safeguards agreement (CSA),
together with an additional protocol (AP), is the current verification standard pursuant to Article
111.1.Together, a CSA and AP provide the basis for the IAEA to draw an annual conclusion
regarding the peaceful nature of a State's nuclear program. We urge those States that have yet
to sign and ratify an AP to do so.
The NPT also supports furthering the application of effective safeguards. To this end, Canada
welcomes efforts by the IAEA to apply the State-level Concept to the implementation of
safeguards . We support the continuing evaluation by States Parties of existing safeguards
measures to ensure they remain effective , and evolve as required to achieve the objectives of
the NPT.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed between the E3/EU+3 and Iran in 2015
constitutes an important element of the non-proliferation regime, which, as long as it is fully
implemented by Iran and verified by the IAEA, helps to build the confidence of the international
community that Iran's nuclear program is exclusively peaceful in nature. The IAEA has an
essential role in this process and Canada has contributed $11.5 million to the IAEA's verification
efforts in Iran since 2014 .
Mr. Chair,
Canada remains concerned with non-compliance by North Korea and Syria with their nonproliferation obligations . These cases undermine the NPT, and present a direct threat to the
broader non-proliferation regime.
North Korea's ongoing efforts to enhance the capabilities of its nuclear weapons program and
ballistic missile delivery systems pose a serious challenge to international peace and security .
Canada also deplores North Korea's relentless sanctions evasion and related proliferation
activities, and calls on the international community to strengthen our collective counterproliferation efforts and support the full implementation of relevant UNSC resolutions .

Canada stands ready to support efforts to forge peaceful multilateral solutions to address North
Korea's illegal WMD programs and enhance security in the region . We welcome recent
diplomatic engagement on the Korean Peninsula and hope that it will lead to sustained dialogue
toward North Korea's complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclearization . For its part, in
January 2018, Canada co-hosted with the United States a Foreign Ministers' meeting to
examine available avenues to address this pressing international threat. We continue to call
upon North Korea to resume adherence to the NPT and abide by its safeguards and relevant
international obligations .
With regard to Syria , Canada deeply regrets that Syria has yet to respond to the IAEA's
repeated requests to resolve that country's non-compliance with its non-proliferation obligations ,
in connection with issues related to the Dair Alzour site and three other related sites. Canada
underscores the need for Syria to uphold its safeguards obligations under the Treaty.
of the NPT stipulates that each State Party undertake
Concerning export controls , Article 111.2
not to provide nuclear-related exports to any non-nuclear-weapon state for peaceful purposes,
unless the transfers are subject to the safeguards required by Article 111.1
of the Treaty. We
underline the need for all States Party to exercise continued vigilance in their nuclear export
controls.
To this end, Canada continues to value the role that the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear
Suppliers Group play in facilitating legitimate nuclear trade among States while respecting nonproliferation commitments .
Mr. Chair,
It has been observed that not all States Parties see themselves as having a stake in the
safeguards regime at the heart of this Committee 's work . Canada does not share this
view . While the world is a dramatically safer place because of the NPT, our collective security is
not ensured unless we are fully confident that cases of proliferation and non-compliance are
addressed, and for this the international safeguards regime must continue to work robustly. This
is as true for states without significant nuclear facilities as it is for those of us with large
domestic nuclear industries . As we approach the 501h anniversary of the NPT's entry into force,
it is vital that we not lose sight of the positive strategic impact that safeguards have had - and
continue to have - for all States.
Finally, as a contributor to the efforts of the "Vienna Group of Ten", Canada draws attention to
the Group's Working Paper on 'Vienna Issues' that has been submitted to the Secretariat, as
well as the NPDl's Working Paper on the issue of safeguards . We believe that these will make a
valuable contribution to this Committee 's deliberations.
Thank you .

