Statement by Chinese Delegation at the First Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference on
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapon has a direct bearing on global and regional
peace and stability, as well as the well-being of all peoples. Strengthening the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and eliminating nuclear proliferation
risk are elements inherent in efforts to preserve the Treaty of Non-Proliferation. It
serves the common interest of the international community, and is a shared challenge
for all states.
China believes root causes of nuclear proliferation are complex and that both
causes and symptoms of nuclear proliferation should be addressed through an
integrated approach. Efforts for nuclear non-proliferation should be strengthened
within the framework of global nuclear governance.
Firstly, to strive to build up a peaceful and stable international security
environment. States should establish a security concept characterized as common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable, embrace the idea of community of common
destiny for mankind. They should discard zero-sum thinking and the cold-war mindset,
and fully respect and accommodate the legitimate security concern of each state, to
achieve the universal security and eliminate root causes of nuclear proliferation.
Secondly, to stick to the peaceful settlement for proliferation issues via political
and diplomatic endeavor. State should adhere to dialogue and negotiation within the
framework of existing international laws to address relevant concern, and refrain from
reflexively resorting to sanctions, the use or threat of force and should not use
non-proliferation as an excuse for pursuing other aims.
Thirdly, to enhance the authority and effectiveness of a fair and equitable
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. States should discard double standards
and utilitarianism, implement obligations of the Treaty in a comprehensive, faithful
and balanced manner. They should avoid setting non-proliferation standards according
to the existence or absence of affinities between states, uphold multilateralism and
continuously reinforce the fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory nature of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime on the basis of universal participation
and democratic decision-making.
Fourthly, to consolidate and strengthen the Treaty’s status as the cornerstone of
international non-proliferation regime, and improve its universality. States that have

not yet joined the Treaty should do so as non-nuclear-weapon States as soon as
possible and place all of their nuclear facilities under the safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in accordance with Treaty provisions.
The role of the United Nations and other relevant international organizations and
mechanisms should be fully utilized. Earnest efforts should also be made to promote
the universality of the IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreements and additional
protocols. All states should support the efforts of the Zangger Committee and the
Nuclear Suppliers Group in this regard.
Fifthly, to handle the relationship between nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy following the principle of fairness and balance.
Preventing proliferation nuclear weapons and promoting peaceful use of nuclear
energy are not collided with each other, but are mutually reinforcing. Any measures
taken to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons should not undermine the
legitimate rights of states to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Meanwhile, all
proliferation activities carried out under the pretext of peaceful use should be
prohibited.
Mr. Chairman,
China is firmly committed to preserving and promoting the authority,
universality and effectiveness of the Treaty. China firmly opposes any forms of
nuclear proliferation, fulfills its obligations in a serious and comprehensive manner
and implement relevant United Nation Security Council Resolutions. In recent years,
China has worked in a relentless way to strengthen and improve its national
non-proliferation regime in areas such as mechanism building, law making and
enforcement capacity enhancing. as to ensure effective implementation of
non-proliferation policies.
Mr. Chairman,
As the permanent member of the UN Security Council and a responsible
stakeholder, China actively takes part into the relevant international cooperation, and
has made unremitting endeavor in promoting political and diplomatic resolution of
relevant hop-spot nuclear proliferation issues.
China welcomes the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iranian nuclear issue in July 2015, and appreciates the progress made
since the implementation day of the JCPOA. As a member of P5+1 countries, China
has actively participated in the negotiation, and contributed “Chinese Wit” and
“Chinese Plan” to the conclusion of the agreement. The JCPOA is an international
agreement concluded by the P5+1 and Iran after long-term tough negotiations, and
has been endorsed by the United Nations Security Council. All parties should
2

strengthen political will, faithfully fulfill their obligations, and to jointly maintain and
implement the JCPOA. Thanks to the hard work in previous negotiations,Chinese and
Iranian companies initialed their first commercial contract on the renovation of the
Arak heavy-water reactor on April 23,which marked the renovation work has entered
the stage of implementation, and reflected China’s responsible attitude and firmly
support to the JCPOA.
For the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula, China persists in achieving the
denuclearization of the Peninsula, persists in maintaining the peace and stability of the
Peninsula and persists in solving the issue through dialogue and consultation. Parities
involved should continue opposing developing or deploying nuclear weapons in the
Korean Peninsula, faithfully and comprehensively implement relevant UN Security
Council Resolutions, and keep calm and restrained to alleviate tension in this region
with a responsible manner. In order to pull back this issue getting back to the
negotiating table at an early date, China has raised the “dual-track approach” and
“suspension for suspension”
considerations over them.

proposal. we hope relevant parties can give well

Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on the issue of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons which elaborates China’s relevant positions. We
hope the elements contained therein will be reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

