Check Against Delivery

Statement by Chinese Delegation at the Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference on
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and
Nuclear Issues in the Middle East
(30th April, 2018 Geneva)

Mr. Chairman,
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones is an important step toward a nuclear
-weapon-free world, which has great importance in advancing nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation, as well as promoting regional and global peace and
security. As the ultimate goal of the comprehensive prohibition and thorough
elimination of nuclear weapons could not to be achieved over night, it is necessary to
adopt feasible intermediate measures in a step by step manner. The international
community should continue to support the efforts of non-nuclear-weapon States in
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of consultations among
themselves and voluntary agreements according to their actual regional situations.
China has always committed not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and firmly supported the
global efforts of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones. China has signed and
ratified all the relevant protocols to Treaties on Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones which
are open for signature, and has unswervingly fulfilled the relevant obligations.
China firmly supports the establishment of the Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia. It has deposited its ratification of the Protocol to the Treaty. We are ready to
deepen our cooperation with relevant parties on this issue to jointly maintain the
principals and objectives of the Treaty and its Protocol and promote peace and
security in central Asia and the world as a whole.
China has resolved all pending issues with ASEAN countries regarding the Protocol
to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. If the ASEAN decide
to sign the Protocol with five nuclear weapon states separately, China will actively
consider to be the first to sign. Meanwhile, China is ready to assist the ASEAN to
resolve disputes on reservation issue with the other four nuclear weapon states on the
basis of not affecting previous consensus which have already been reached.

1

On the issue of Mongolia’s nuclear-weapon-free status, China always respects the
efforts made by Mongolia. With the efforts made by China, the five nuclear-weapon
States issued joint statement that reiterate the support for Mongolia's status and the
supply of relevant security assurances. China will continue to honor its commitment
and work together with other parties to maintain Mongolia’s nuclear-weapon-free
status.
Mr. Chairman,
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction will not only do good to nonproliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, but also help ease tension in the Middle East and promote regional and
global peace and stability.
China firmly supports to implement the Action Plan of the 8th Review Conference of
the NPT and to convene the International Conference on the Establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction
at an early date. We fully understand the concerns of Arabic countries in this regard,
and call upon all relevant parties to demonstrate political will and take practical
measures to strive to reach consensus on the arrangements of the Conference as soon
as possible. China is willing to participate actively in the relevant process and provide
all necessary assistance.
Meanwhile, China calls on that states concerned in the region of Middle East should
sign and ratify Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements with IAEA, Israel should
accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon State, and the
international society should continue to encourage concerned states to sign and ratify
the Additional Protocol.
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on nuclear issues, which
elaborates China's relevant positions. We hope the elements contained therein will be
reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

2

