CZECH REPUBLIC

Statement by

Mrs. Veronika Stromsikova
Director of the United Nations Department,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic

at the Main Committee II
of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

New York, 4 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,
The Czech Republic fully supports the statement delivered on behalf of the EU. It is my
honour to draw your attention to the issues that are of particular importance to my country.
The Czech Republic acknowledges the positive results of the work of the UN and numerous
international control regimes and initiatives in the area of non-proliferation. The second NPT
pillar is now much stronger than it has ever been. However, while there is a general
recognition of undisputable validity of UNSC resolution 1540, not all States abide by some
other UNSC and IAEA resolutions, nor do they always act as NPT adherents.
The Czech Republic supports the right of States Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes but in full conformity with their non-proliferation obligations. We are of the view
that non-compliance should be challenged and States should be held responsible and
accountable for their violations. We strongly believe that all cases of non-compliance must be
reported, as it is required by the IAEA Statute, to the Security Council and the General
Assembly of the United Nations. In our view, there are a few cases that have been
undermining the global non-proliferation system and international security for several years.
The Czech Republic therefore fully supports the Nuclear Security Summit process, the goal of
which is to promote responsibility of all states for securing all nuclear and radioactive
material on their territories. In our view, this forum contributes to maintaining effective
security and preventing non-state actors from acquiring nuclear materials. Through the
framework of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative and with the assistance of the United
States, the Czech Republic has successfully repatriated all of its highly enriched uranium and
converted all of its research reactors to low enriched uranium fuel, thus effectively becoming
a HEU-free country and fulfilling one of the main objectives of the NSS process.
In this regard, the Czech Republic would like to emphasize the unique nature and
irreplaceable role of the IAEA, which through its verification activities in the area of
safeguards directly contributes to strengthening of international confidence and increasing of
the credibility of the NPT regime. Taking into consideration the challenges facing the
Agency, it is our shared responsibility that the Agency is equipped with sufficient resources
for fulfilment of its duties stemming from the NPT, as well as all the other tasks assigned to it.
The Czech Republic remains fully committed to strengthening the IAEA safeguards system
by actively participating in the IAEA Member States Support Programme since 2002, namely
through organizing trainings for Agency's safeguards inspectors, developing and testing of
new IAEA surveillance systems and offering high quality analytical services in the field of
nuclear materials.
In order to optimize the IAEA's verification activ1t1es, recogmt10n of new verification
standards are needed. The Czech Republic has been a continuous supporter of establishing the
Additional Protocol as the core standard of the verification process and the verification
activities of the Agency as the key measure to ensure the peaceful nature of a nuclear
programme. In our view, the acceptance of Additional Protocol has a deterrent effect on

nuclear proliferation and brings about a next logical level concept in the Integrated Safeguards
implementation, the optimum combination of all safeguard measures available to the Agency.
Thank you for your attention.

