Statement of Egypt
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster II Issues: Implementation of the provisions of the Treaty relating to NonProliferation of Nuclear weapons, Safeguards and nuclear-weapon-free zones

Mr. Chairman,
1. The delegation of Egypt associates itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
2. Non-Proliferation is one of the three central pillars around which the Treaty is constructed. For
non-proliferation efforts to be effective within the Treaty regime, non-proliferation has to be
pursued in all its aspects, preventing both vertical as well as horizontal proliferation, at the same
time at which parallel nuclear disarmament efforts advance, in a manner that ensures that nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament efforts are balanced, mutually reinforcing and truly
contributing to the realization of the Treaty objectives.
3. We acknowledge that the NPT has covered non-proliferation obligations in a clear and
balanced manner but regrettably realize that these obligations continue to be implemented in a
selective manner.
4. While obligations of Nuclear-Weapon-States are clear under Article I of the Treaty,
preventing them from transferring nuclear weapons to any other State, practices of nuclear
sharing under security arrangements which violate Article I still continue. These practices violate
at the same time commitments undertaken by non-nuclear-weapon-States as some of them accept
stationing of nuclear weapons on their territories or build their security under nuclear umbrellas
provided by nuclear-weapon-States, in contradiction to the very letter and spirit of the Treaty and
in a practice which offers false legitimacy to these weapons and obstructs the drive towards the
realization of nuclear-weapon-free-world. It is clear in our view that violations to Articles I and
II of the NPT, contribute overtime to the erosion of the credibility of the Treaty and truly
undermine the potential to advance respect to its non-proliferation and disarmament obligations.
Mr. Chairman,
5. IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements continue to represent the legitimate source of
assurance under the Treaty against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the effective
instrument to confirm that peaceful nuclear activities in non-nuclear-weapon-States remain
peaceful.

6. Comprehensive Safeguards should thus remain at the center of non-proliferation efforts, in the
IAEA multilateral framework since the verification standard under the NPT is and will remain
Comprehensive Safeguards.
7. We note with great concern efforts to promote the universality of the Model Additional
Protocol in Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States as a priority that precedes the priority of universality of
Comprehensive Safeguards. We firmly believe that for the NPT to provide a meaningful
contribution to a world free of nuclear weapons, non-proliferation cannot be advanced on the
account of nuclear disarmament. The primary objective of the international community should
remain the universalization of Comprehensive Safeguards, both regionally and internationally.
This regional consideration is one that can best be demonstrated in the Middle East, where the
IAEA continues to struggle to apply Comprehensive Safeguards to all States in the region, with
only one State rejecting such application and defying any IAEA safeguards beyond symbolic
limited arrangements that overlook activities of serious concern both under the Treaty and within
the regional security context.
8. The practice that is being witnessed today, steadily seeking to increase safeguards obligations
on non-nuclear-weapon-States, in the absence of any parallel or legally-comparable safeguards
obligations in Nuclear-Weapon-States dedicated to nuclear disarmament, is unhelpful to the
nuclear disarmament aspirations embodied in the NPT and in effect seeks to promote the nonproliferation dimension of the NPT in total disconnect from its disarmament dimension to an
extent only serving to assure the continued existence of nuclear weapons under the Treaty. This
should not continue if nuclear disarmament is to be effectively pursued under the NPT.
9. In this regard, the Decision on “Principles and Objectives of Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament” provides significant guidance that should be observed fully, with regard to the
conditions listed under paragraph 12 of that decision with regard to Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements being an essential requirement before supply of nuclear material or equipment can
be provided to any State. This is not being observed as we speak, nor are efforts to achieve the
universality of the Treaty as an urgent priority identified by that Decision.
Mr. Chairman,
10. Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones contribute significantly to international peace and security. The
goal of the establishment of a NWFZ in the Middle East has gained an exceptional and urgent
priority under the indefinitely extended Treaty since 1995 and the Resolution on the Middle East,
as a central element in the indefinite extension package in 1995 stands witness to that, although
little has been realized in the practical implementation of that Resolution to date. The
prominence of that goal is not only due to its contribution to the currently undermined security of
Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States from that region, but also to the relevance of its realization to goal
of Treaty universality.

11. We believe that progress in this review cycle will require a strong component of success in
implementing the 2010 Plan of Action on the Middle East. Given that four years have passed
since the adoption of the plan without the date of the Conference being announced to date, and
the limited time available before the Review Conference, we remain committed to pursue the
implementation of the 2010 mandate on the Middle East and to convene this year, 2014, the
postponed 2012 Conference on the Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction. We trust the conveners of the Conference will assist in the
realization of this objective and facilitate the advancement of our collective interest in that
regard.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman

Egypt

Third Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster III Issues: Implementation of the provisions of the Treaty relating to the
inalienable right of all parties to the Treaty to develop, research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes

