Statement by
H.E. Ambassador Hisham Badr
Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs for International
Organizations and Multilateral Affairs of
The Arab Republic of Egypt
Before

The Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee to the 2015
NPT Review Conference
Cluster I1 specific issues: Regional issues, including with
respect to the Middle East and implementation of the 1995
Middle East Resolution

Geneva, April 29'h 2013

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
We have listened with interest to the report of the facilitator on the full
implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East and we thank
him for his diligent efforts. We have also listened to the statements delivered
here today on what we consider the fourth pillar of the NPT; that is the
establishment of a Middle East fi-ee of nuclear weapons and all weapons of
mass destruction. Indeed, the establishment of such a zone has become
enshrined in the NPT as it was, to use the language of the 20 10 W T Action
Plan, as "an essential element of the 1995 Conference and of the basis on
which the Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote in 1995".

NLr. Chairman,
Egypt has accompanied the instrument of ratification in 1981 a declaration
outlining the grounds upon which it decided to ratify the NPT. In the last
paragraph it clearly said:

'Tn conclusion, Egypt wishes to point out that it has ratFed the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, out of strong belief that this step
complies with its supreme national interests, provided the Treaty succeeds in
curbing the proliferation of nuclear weapons throughout the world,
particularly in the Middle East, which should remain completely free of
nuclear weapons, if it is to contribute constructively to peace, security and
prospeviv for its people and the world at large."

Since the ratification in 1981, no steps were taken to achieve this objective
until the 1995 Resolution was unanimously adopted within the package of
the indefinite extension of the Treaty. At the time, we took the commitment
0.f the depository states, which were the cosponsors of the 1995 Middle East
resolution, very seriously and were ready to engage in the process that would
lead to the establishment of that zone. However, another fifteen years
elapsed until the 20 10 NPT Review Conference succeeded in ,adopting the
Action Plan and the practical steps to be taken for the establishment of the
Middle East zone.

We have fully engaged and cooperated with the facilitator and the conveners
for over a year and presented them with an Arab working paper entailing our
vision concerning all procedural and substantive issues. The response we got
for this engagement was the announcement of the unilateral postponement of
the Conference to a non-specified future date without even consulting with
the states of the region. This followed the expressed commitment of all but

one country in the Middle East to attend such a conference. We reject the
excuses that were given. The postponement was a flagrant non-fulfillment of
agreed commitments. m e e d , it is yet mother step in a long history of
unimplemented decisions regardmg the establishment of a zone hee of
nuclear weapons in the Middle East.

Mr. Chairman,
It is no secret that we tool: the decision on attending this meeting only few
days before the beginning of the Prepcorn. I think it is also no secret that
there was serious debate within the Arab Group on whether we should be
attending this meeting in the first place. We decided to attend this meeting to
engage and listen. We also came with a strong and coherent message. This
message is simply that we will not renegotiate the 2010 Action Plan. We are
keen on implementing what the NPT community agreed upon by consensus.
The conveners had no authority to postpone the Conference that the NPT
Prepcorn agreed to, a fact that was clearly stated by one of the co-conveners
themselves, and 1 take this opportunity to appreciate the strong stance taken
by Russia in support of the legitimacy of NPT through the implementation
of the concrete actions decided in 2010. There was an exact date in the 20 10
Action plan that was not met and we insist now on an exact date to be set for
convening the conference. Once that date is set, discussions on all proposals
and modalities regarding holding the conference shohd proceed as quickly
as possible.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt strongly supports the NPT regime. It has always championed the
cause of a nuclear weapon fkee world. However, the establishment of a
Middle East nuclear weapon free zone is essential for our national interest.
We cannot wait forever for the launching of a process that would lead to the
establishment of this zone, a process that was repeatedly committed to
within the NPT. we cannot continue to attend meetings and agree on
outcomes that do not get implemented, yet to be expected to abide by the
concessions we gave for this outcome.
Mr. Chairman,
The Arab S h t resolution in March 20 12 has clearly indicated that the
Arab countries will review their position vis-i-vis the non-implementation of
the Action Plan. In light of the above, Egypt has decided to withdraw fiom
the rest of the second session of the Preparatory Committee of the NPT

Review Conference right after this statement, to protest this unacceptable
and continuous failure to implement the 1995 Middle East Resolution.
The breach of the 2010 Action Plan's clear decision to hold a Conference in
2012 is yet another failure to implement a key NPT commitment. Egypt's
withdrawal from the second prepcom aims to send a strong message of
dissatisfaction with the lack of seriousness in dealing with the issue of
establishing a zone fiee of nuclear weapons, a central component of
regional, Arab and Egyptian national security, whch impacts directly
international peace and security. As a strong supporter of the NPT regime,
Egypt is very concerned about the ramification of the non-hlfillment of
commitments on the credibility and sustainability of the NPT regime, which
was indefinitely extended based on the 1995 Middle East Resolution.

I repeat at the end of this statement that we cannot wait forever for this
resolution to be implemented. The NPT members, the Secretary General of
the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the NPT
community at large, should all bear their responsibility in tlus regard to
uphold international legitimacy.
Thank you Mr. Chairman

