EMBASSY
OF THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
VIENNA

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Omar Amer
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt
to the International Organizations in Vienna
Arab Republic of Egypt

The First Session of the Preparatory Committee to the
2020 NPf Review Conference

Cluster II:
Nuclear Nonproliferation and Safeguards

Vienna. May 2017

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
The nonproliferation of nuclear weapons remains a critical challenge
for international security. Although the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has served as the legal and normative foundation for
limiting the spread of nuclear weapons since its entry into force, international
peace and security continues to be at risk. Nuclear weapons exist today in
thousands, a disturbing and sinister reality which the founders of the NPT
would not have possibly anticipated, that 49 years after concluding the
Treaty, the world continues to be at threatened from the most destructive
weapons ever created by mankind.

While the NPT has significantly limited the horizontal proliferation of
nuclear weapons, it has nevertheless been deficient in addressing their
vertical proliferation. Total and irreversible nuclear disarmament remains the
only guarantee for the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. We cannot
address nonproliferation without highlighting the immediate connectivity
with disarmament. As long as nuclear weapons exist, the risk of their
proliferation will linger. Accordingly, my delegation would like to emphasize
that nuclear non-proliferation must be pursued in all its aspects and that
efforts aimed at preventing non-proliferation must be parallel to simultaneous
efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament. Egypt strongly believes that efforts by
the nuclear weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
weapons should be undertaken in a transparent, irreversible, and
internationally verifiable manner, as such steps will highly reduce any
likelihood of their proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt views with serious concern the readiness by some NPT State
Parties, particularly nuclear weapon States, to cooperate with States non-Party
to the NPT in the nuclear field . Rather than exert efforts to encourage and
promote universal adherence to the NPT and reinforce the global nuclear
nonproliferation regime, it is regrettable that some state parties are engaging
in cooperative exchanges and offering assistance in the field of nuclear
technology to States that have snubbed the NPT. By doing so, these state
parties not only send a misguided message of their willingness to cooperate
with states non-party to the NPT, they also weaken the incentive for these
states to join the Treaty and reduce the prospect of achieving its universality.

My delegation takes this opportunity therefore, to call upon all State
Parties to the NPT engaged in such cooperative exchanges to reconsider such
an approach with a view to halt such exchanges, and calls upon all states nonparty to the NPT to accede to the Treaty at the earliest date, particularly those
States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, in order to maximize
their benefits from cooperation in the nuclear field under the authority and
guidance of the NPT.

We emphasize that strict observance of and adherence to the IAEA
comprehensive safeguards and to the NPT should be a condition for any
cooperation in the nuclear field with states non-party to the Treaty, or for any
supply arrangements with these States for the transfer of source or special
fissionable material, equipment, or material.
Mr. Chairman,

Despite the ceaseless calls over decades to the nuclear weapon States to
realize the total and irreversible elimination of nuclear weapons, regrettably,
they continue to exist with astounding numbers. The lack of commitment by
NWS to implement Article VI of the NPT with good faith however, isn't the
only deficiency. Disturbingly, nuclear weapons remain deployed in the
territories of certain non-Nuclear Weapon States and nuclear deterrence
continues to dominate the security and defense doctrines of certain military
alliances. These actions have severely undermined the credibility of the NPT
and its integrity.
Let us be clear; any horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons and
nuclear-weapon sharing arrangements by States Parties to the Treaty
constitutes a clear violation of non-proliferation obligations undertaken by
nuclear weapon States under Article I and by non-Nuclear Weapon States
under Article II of the Treaty. Such arrangements puts the effectiveness and
credibility of the Treaty into question. While some State Parties to the NPT
label the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons as a priority in national
security, they act with indifference when it comes to nuclear sharing
arrangements. We urge State Parties that engage in nuclear-weapon sharing
arrangements to put an end to such engagements under any circumstances
and any kind of security arrangements, including in the framework of
military alliances.
Mr. Chairman,
While Egypt believes that constructive and practical efforts should be
maintained globally to ensure the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and
other nuclear explosive devices, and guarantee that every effort is made to
implement the NPT in all its aspects, we nevertheless underline that such
efforts should in no way obstruct the inalienable right to peaceful uses of
nuclear energy by States Parties to the Treaty, as clearly stated in Decision 2
on Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament of the
1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference.

Egypt refuses any attempts that impose restrictions or limitations on
the transfer of nuclear equipment, material, and technology to States parties
to the Treaty that have concluded comprehensive safeguards agreements with
the International Atomic Energy Agency. We believe that the obligation under
Article III of the NPT in verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear programs
provides enough credible assurances that would enable States parties to
engage in the transfer of nuclear equipment, material, and technology for

peaceful purposes in accordance with Article IV of the Treaty. Efforts that aim
to obstruct the transfer of nuclear equipment, material, and technology
contravenes with the principles and spirit of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt recognizes that the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards are a fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, play a crucial role in the implementation of the Treaty, and help
create an environment conducive to nuclear cooperation. We underline that
the IAEA is the sole competent authority responsible for verification of the
fulfillment of safeguard obligations assumed by States parties under the NPT.
We stress the importance of the IAEA safeguards agreements and urge all
States that have not yet done so, to bring into force comprehensive safeguards
agreements as soon as possible, in order to consolidate the verification system
for the non-proliferation regime. Nothing should be done to undermine the
authority of the International Atomic Energy Agency in this regard.
My delegation however, would like to underscore that while ensuring
the peaceful nature of nuclear programs is imperative, it is important
nonetheless to make a clear distinction between the legal obligations
stipulated in the NPT and other voluntary, optional confidence building
measures undertaken by a state party to the NPT. Such voluntary
undertakings shall not be turned into legal safeguards obligations. We believe
that it is the sovereign prerogative of any state to conclude any additional
measures and that comprehensive safeguards agreements with the IAEA are
sufficient and appropriate enough to enable the IAEA with its verification
tasks.
Furthermore, we call on nuclear weapon States to conclude full-scope
safeguards agreements with the IAEA in accordance with its statute, for
verifying the fulfillment of their obligations assumed under the NPT. We
stress the statutory role of IAEA in nuclear disarmament, including applying
safeguards on nuclear materials derived from the dismantling of nuclear
weapons. We emphasize that the work of the Agency with regard to
safeguards and verification has to be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of its statute and safeguards agreements.

Mr. Chairman,
The nuclear nonproliferation regime would be greatly reinforced with
universal adherence to the NPT. Egypt calls upon all States non-Party to the
NPT to accede immediately and without preconditions to the Treaty as nonnuclear weapon states and to place all their nuclear facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards. By achieving the universality of the NPT,
the objectives and principles of the Treaty become strengthened. We reaffirm
the importance of Decision 2 of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference which stipulates that universal adherence to the Treaty is an

urgent priority. As universal adherence to any Treaty is a reflection of its
credibility and validity, the international community should therefore,
redouble its efforts to exert pressure on those remaining States that have
rejected the NPT in an effort to strengthen its objectives.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt reaffirm~ that the strict observance of all the provisions of the
NPT remains central to achieving the shared objectives of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, preventing, under any circumstances, the further
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and preserving the Treaty's vital
contribution to peace and security.

Thank you.

