
Mr. Chairman,
France fully adheres to the statement made on behalf of the European Union on this
chapter.
I would like to add a few words from a national standpoint to this statement.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery is a major threat to
international security and peace; it is also a threat to affected regions which must be
resolutely opposed.
All the goals which we are pursuing as part of the Treaty are threatened by the severe
proliferation crises which undermine the very foundations of strengthened collective
security for all. Those crises are an obstacle to disarmament and an obstacle to the
promotion of civil nuclear energy.
The fight against proliferation is therefore essential for our collective security. It must be
led on three fronts: providing a firm response to proliferation crises, strengthening the
international nuclear non-proliferation system and last, stepping up concrete efforts to
prevent and curb proliferation.
First of all, regarding the question of Iran’s nuclear capabilities, 2013 saw a major first,
positive step forward when the Geneva agreement was signed on November 24. The
Joint Plan of Action entered into force on January 20. It has been implemented by Iran
in a satisfactory manner to date. We can consider the most worrying main activities of
the Iranian nuclear programme to be frozen at present. For their part, the European
Union and the United States have scrupulously observed their commitments regarding
the temporary and reversible suspension of some of the sanctions against Iran.
The Iranian nuclear programme has been pursued for more than 10 years in violation of
the resolutions adopted first by the IAEA Board of Governors, then in violation of the
United Nations Security Council, and remains a major source of concern for the
5

international community. The negotiation of a long-term solution is underway. The
Geneva Joint Plan of Action has set the deadline of July 20 for the E3+3 group and Iran
to meet their objectives. Discussions, which have been ongoing for just over two months,
have proved to be useful. Considerable limitations on the Iranian programme for the
duration of the long-term agreement shall be needed to restore the trust of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s intentions. We also
call on Iran to provide clear explanations on the potential military aspect of some of its
activities past and present, as part of its dialogue with the IAEA. Concrete results in this
regard shall be essential in reaching a long-term agreement. France is determined to
fully play its role in these discussions to reach a satisfactory solution for international
peace and security, in full compliance with Iran’s rights as a non-nuclear weapon state
party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
With regard to the North Korean crisis, the situation remains extremely worrying.
Although the ballistics test in December 2012 and the nuclear test in February 2013 were
unanimously condemned by the international community, with the adoption of
resolutions 2087 and 2094 by the United Nations Security Council, North Korea
conducted more ballistic missile launches in March 2014, including two medium-range
ballistic missile launches, and continues to issue aggressive statements. At the same
time, the regime is openly stating its aim to develop its nuclear and ballistics
programmes further, in violation of its international obligations. North Korea has
decided to restart its nuclear complex at the Yongbyon site, and has carried out
considerable work over the past few months on the nuclear and ballistics sites within its
borders. This attitude is unacceptable: it constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security, and a major challenge for the international non-proliferation regime.
The time has come for this country to return to the road of cooperation and full
compliance with the law by conducting the complete, verifiable and irreversible
dismantling of its nuclear and ballistics programme, as required by resolutions 1695,
1718, 1874, 2087 and 2094 of the Security Council. North Korea must immediately
provide serious demonstrations of its willingness to cooperate, allow IAEA inspectors to
return to the country, providing them with access to all nuclear facilities, cease all
proliferating activity and abstain from any further action which could increase the
tensions in the region.
Finally, regarding Syria, further to the resolution adopted by the IAEA Board of
Governors in June 2011, based on the IAEA report, France continues to call for all light
to be shed on Syria’s past and present nuclear activities, while taking into account the
development of the political situation in the country. We continue to fully support the
Director-General of the IAEA in this regard.
Dear Colleagues, Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA holds an essential role within the international non-proliferation
regime, and France believes that in order to strengthen it further we must as a priority
support the efforts of the Agency to ensure that its safeguards system remains fully
effective and credible.
6

To achieve this, we must call for the universal application and strengthening of the IAEA
safeguards system.
In order to fulfil the goals of article III.1 of the NPT, France believes that the
verification standard should be the implementation of a comprehensive
safeguards agreement together with an additional protocol. The universal
application of these two legal instruments therefore remains a priority.
Under the particularly restricted current economic and financial conditions, our
efforts must above all focus on continually strengthening the safeguards system
of the IAEA, and we are convinced that a State-level approach, already a reality for
more than 50 Member States under integrated safeguards, makes a considerable
contribution to this goal.
That is why France supports this development, which allows the IAEA to best fulfil
its mandate of checking the accuracy and completeness of declarations by making use of
all available sources of information regarding the safeguards and through their objective
and independent analysis. The Agency shall thus be able to draw the most accurate
conclusions possible for each State and meet the growing demand for verification
activities by making better use of already existing resources.
Furthermore, we encourage IAEA Member States to implement the full
consequences in cases where a country has been declared to be in noncompliance with its international obligations in terms of non-proliferation:
suspension of access to the Agency's programme of technical cooperation and assistance
in the relevant areas, reaffirmation of the role of the United Nations Security Council,
implementation by the State at fault of voluntary transparency measures in order to
restore the trust of the international community as soon as possible.
France will continue to help strengthen the resources of the IAEA, in particular human
and technical resources, through the provision of its skills and expertise under its
National Safeguards Support Program.
Mr. Chairman,
Past investigations by the IAEA have uncovered the existence of a vast international
network trafficking sensitive technology, which has not been fully exposed.
The implementation of the rigorous and universal control of exports of the most
sensitive nuclear technologies, equipment and materials is a condition essential to the
development of the nuclear trade.
The Zangger committee must continue its work to implement universal principles for
export controls. Furthermore, France is working within the nuclear suppliers group to
ensure export control rules are consistent with the other obligations of the Treaty.

7

Finally, the fight against proliferation requires us to step up concrete efforts to prevent
and curb this threat. We must better control exports, supervise access to the most
sensitive training, curb proliferating trafficking, punish proliferating activities and
identify and cut out their financing. We must also strive to better implement resolution
1540, both to strengthen our national systems and to provide countries with the support
they need to do so.
Dear colleagues;
In conclusion, I would like to mention the persistent concerns of the international
community concerning the risks of proliferation which could result from withdrawal
from the Treaty, and recall France’s stance on the issue. Let us be clear. Withdrawal from
the Treaty is a sovereign right, which we do not call into question. However, this right
cannot be exercised under just any conditions. To guarantee the integrity of the Treaty,
and the long-term nature of our work to fight nuclear proliferation, we must prevent
abuses of this right. I will have the opportunity to come back to this particular issue
later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, dear colleagues.

8

