
Mr. Chairman,
I.

The French Delegation would like to fully support the statement made on
behalf of the European Union by the Danish Presidency.

Mr. Chairman,
2.

The proliferation of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery is a major
threat to international security and peace; it is also a threat to the affected
regions themselves and must be firmly opposed.
L

3. The international community must provide a firm response to proliferation
crises and fight relentlessly against the misuse of civil nuclear materials for
purposes that run counter to the aims of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation treaty.

4. It is essential to preserve the integrity of this Treaty, which remains the legal
bedrock of our nuclear non-proliferation regime, and an essential instrument
for our collective security, while promoting the peaceful uses of the atom.
5. All the goals which we are pursuing under the Treaty are threatened by the

serious proliferation crises which we are currently facing: goals of nonproliferation, disarmament, promotion of civil nuclear energy, creation of a
zone free of nuclear xveapons and other %yeaponsof mass destruction and their
means of delir-el?-in t i l e Middie Fast,

6, I t is therefore especi;l;ig- iraporto:~i: tl?,::l: ijlc i~;ternatiiPna~coil:;nl;llit.
de~nonst~ates
its capacity to act quic1;ly and deeisiveiy in respoi~seto these

challenges, as many countries have confirmed their desire to have access to
nuclear energy to meet fast-growing energy needs, despite the tragic accident
which occurred in the Fukushima Daiichi plant.
7. Any serious failure by a State to meet its obligations undermines mutual trust
and damages the development of international cooperation on the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, to the detriment of the vast majority of States which
honour their commitments in good faith.

8. Nuclear proliferation is also likely to slow down efforts for nuclear
disarmament, which we all aspire to.
The fight against proliferation is therefore essential for our collective security.
It must be led on three fronts: providing a firm response to proliferation
crises; strengthening the international nuclear non-proliferation regime;
stepping up concrete efforts to prevent and curb proliferation.
9. Firstly the Iranian crisis. For too many years now, Iran has pursued an
enrichment programme without credible civil purposes, in violation of the
resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and the IAEA Board of
Governors. As indicated in the latest IAEA reports, the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate: enrichment activities have been stepped up, in
particular 20% enrichment on the Fordoo site, which was kept hidden from
the international community for a long time; continued activities linked to
heavy water; no progress on clearing up unresolved questions linked to the
possible military dimension highlighted in the appendix of the IAEX report of
November 2011.

On 14 April, the Group of Six once again met in Istanbul to renew discussions
with Iran on its nuclear programme. The Six again showed their unity in their
determination to hold serious discussions with Iran, with the aim that this
country provide answers to the concerns of the international community about
the nature of its nuclear programme, and fully comply with its international
obligations. A further meeting has been agreed to in principle. The discussions
to come will be important: Iran must take urgent and concrete measures to
establish trust, in compliance with the resolutions of the United Nations
Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors concerning this country.
10.With regards to the North Korean crisis, the situation remains extremely
worrying. The two nuclear tests claimed by North Korea have been condemned
by the international community. The discovery, in November 2010, of the
existence of a uranium enrichment facility, in clear violation of resolutions
1718 and 1874, only increases our concerns about the North Korean nuclear
programme. The launch on 13 April this year, which we firmly condemn, is a
new ~4olationby North Korea of its international obligations, which stipulate
that it must abstain from all activities linked to a ballistic missile programme.
The time has come for this countv to return to the road of dialogue and full
con~piianccijith interna5ional la\$13: conducting the camplete, \ erifiabie and
1
.
*
:_.;)I
ei-r;>lc dL\ir,ti~:l:rg=?s;,:
cuciiar p;"iig~i"rlin~:"i~
2s ib:i::i,i~ei4 i); L C S O ~ ~ L L ; ~ : ~
1-18
;1fi:3
18 4 iaot " r ? ~
L-nle~clL*-:&iilt~a bect~rlt>C ~ ~ U I I 1~
C ?~ ~I ~ I J ~~ :L I I T ~ I ~ ~ ~ ~ I ~ ~ > ! alloi;. i:lEiZ inspectors to return to the countq and pmot ide them rtitlr; access to
*

7

all nuclear facilities, cease all proliferating activity and abstain from any
further action which could increase tensions in the region.
11. Finally, with regards to Syria, pursuant to the resolution adopted by the Board
of Governors in June 2011, based on the IAEA report, we call on Damascus to
immediately and fully cooperate with the Agency, and shed all light on its past
and present nuclear activities.
Mr. Chairman,
12. In

order to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, as a priority we
must support the efforts of the IAEA, which continues to play an essential role
in the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, so that its safeguards
system remains fully effective and credible.

13. To achieve this, we must call for the universal application and strengthening of
the IAEA safeguards system.
14. In particular, the obligation set out in Article I11 of the NPT for State Parties
involved to sign a comprehensive safeguards agreement has not been met by
all. To date, 14 States have no comprehensive safeguards agreement in force; 6
of these have initiated no process to this end with the IAEA.

15. Furthermore, as the successive Director Generals of the Agency have regularly
recalled, without the implementation of the additional protocol, the IAEA
cannot come to substantiated conclusions on the absence of clandestine
nuclear materials or activities, and therefore give the international community
credible assurances on the exclusively peaceful purpose of civil nuclear
programmes. France fully shares the opinion that, in order to fulfil the goals of
article 111.1 of the NPT, the combined implementation of a comprehensive
safeguards agreement and an additional protocol must form the
standard for verification.
@

16. To date, 138 countries have already signed an additional Protocol, and 115
States have an additional protocol in force. While real progress has been made,
it remains insufficient.
17. The universal application of these legal instruments continues to be a priority,
and France invites any State which has not already done so to express concrete
support for the non-proliferation regime by implementing them at the earliest
possible opportunity.
18.The French Delegation also supports IAEA measures to strengthen t h e
safepards system, and for a move torvards the objective use of all relevant
sources of information, enabling the most accurate conclusions possible on
~ a c hStatee, Indeed this elxinge ~ ~ o u icontribute
d
to the applicatiorl
ef a
.
cr i.i;b:c cnd efkzki. _: ids 2. stvi"7, ~71;ib;Er1; tkt IA\Ej:-\t3 &XI c
I csp,)~l:i ?oslti\i e
l! 10 "f4c c .m~er,,rii>r?r ct;l,:sts ~ c h E ~ i i l i i ?1~: hicli
,
11dl::
subniifted to them, credible assur~~nces
011 the exclrzsivciy peaceful ~ ' L I T ~ O SofC
<

13b;::~

C L ~

L>\,iif

the nuclear programmes in partner countries, and therefore contribute to the
responsible development of civil nuclear energy.
19. Under the particularly constrained current economic and financial
conditions, which cannot be ignored, our efforts must above all focus on
strengthening the authority of the Agency, with constant scope of
competence, through a better use of existing resources. In particular, we
must encourage the IAEA to:
Apply and ensure strict compliance with, the provisions relating to
States' obligation to provide information and answers, in
particular relating to nuclear facilities, as soon as any decision to build
has been taken (code 3.1 of the subsidiary arrangements);
e

Concentrate on the integrated use of relevant information, and
continue the development of an approach based on the
comprehensive knowledge of the activities and technology
implemented in States;

e

Whenever circumstances require, to conduct special inspections,
with the beneficial effect of depoliticising this tool, unforh~nately
unused since 1993.

2o.Furthermore, we encourage IAEA Member States to draw the full
consequences in cases where a country has been declared to be
non-compliant with its international obligations in terms of nonproliferation: suspension of access to the Agency's programme of technical
cooperation and assistance in the relevant areas, reaffirmation of the role of
the United Nations Security Council, implementation by the State at fault of
voluntary transparency measures in order to restore the trust of the
international community as soon as possible.
21. The safeguards systems is not just an essential tool for non-proliferation and
the development of peaceful uses; Agency safeguards also contribute to
strengthening nuclear security throughout the world and protecting everyone
against the threat of nuclear terrorism, as recently highlighted at the Seoul
summit on nuclear security.
Mr. Chairman,
22.Within this context, France encourages the international community, the IAEX
and all State Parties to continue working to promote the safeguards. In France,
I would like to recall that all civil nuclear facilities for commercial or research
purposes, including its 58 nuclear reactors, are under Euratom or IAE4
safeguards.
will continue to help strengthen the resources
Mr. Chairman,
24.Past investigations by the IAEA have uncovered the existence of a vast
international network trafficking in sensitive technologies, the full facts about
which are not yet clear.
25.This illustrates the need for rigorous and universal controls on exports of the
most sensitive nuclear technologies, equipment and materials, a condition
essential to the development of nuclear trade.
26.The Zangger committee, whose role is recognised in the implementation of the
provision of Article 111-2 of the NPT, must continue its work to implement
universal principles for the control of exports. While export control rules must
be strict and adapted to the difficulties encountered, they must also be
consistent with the other obligations of the Treaty. It is with this objective in
mind that France is participating in the Nuclear Suppliers Group, which we
consider to be an essential instrument for the promotion of a credible,
balanced approach to the control of exports and which provides the framework
necessary for the responsible development of nuclear power.
27. With regards to the most sensitive technologies, France is delighted that
negotiations on the supervision of the transportation of equipment and
technology linked to enrichment and re-processing have been brought to a
successful conclusion. The measures adopted in June 2011 by the Nuclear
Suppliers Group set out a suitable framework which will ensure the best
conditions for the transport of these sensitive technologies.
28.Finally, the fight against proliferation requires us to step up concrete efforts to
prevent and curb this threat. We must better control exports, supervise access
to the most sensitive training, curb proliferating trafficking, punish
proliferating activities and stamp out their financing networks. France is
stepping up its efforts in all these areas. The European Union is doing likewise,
with the adoption in 2008 of the "new lines for action against proliferation", a
work programme devoted to this purpose.
b

29.We must also strive to better implement resolution 1540, both to strengthen
our national systems and to provide countries with the support they need to do
so. Once more, France, alongside the European Union, is working hard to
actively support the implementation of this resolution.
Mr. Chairman,
3o.To finish, I would like to mention the constant worries of the international
community concerning the potential rislcs of proliferation following a
withdrawal from the Treaty, and recall France's stance on the issue.
new cycle to debate the mechanisms and consequences of such a withdrawal. It
would be desirable for us to agree on some important principles, such as the
fact that a State, after withdrawing from a treaty, remains responsible for
violations committed while it was still party to it.
32.In addition, we believe that it would be inacceptable for a State, after
benefiting from the provisions and the cooperation set out in Article IV of the
NPT to acquire nuclear materials, facilities and technologies, to withdraw from
the Treaty and use these for military purposes. We must reflect together on
potential consequences. Resolution 1887, unanimously adopted by the
Security Council on 24 September 2009, provides us with a concrete roadmap
in this respect.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

