CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY!

Statement by the Federal Republic of Germany at the First
Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Vienna 2 – 12 May 2017

Cluster II (Non-Proliferation)

Mr. Chairman,

I align myself with the Statement by the EU and the NPDIpositions regarding the second pillar of the Nuclear-NonProliferation Treaty.
For at least three decades, there was no doubt that the NPT
was a very successful treaty which strengthened the principle
of non-proliferation and which prevented many countries
from pursuing nuclear options. These days, this overwhelmmingly positive track record of the non-proliferation pillar of
the NPT is sometimes forgotten in the face of debates about
whether the nuclear non-proliferation regime is under threat.
There is a need to take these challenges to the NPT seriously,
and at the same time remain confident in the accomplish1

ments of the NPT in enforcing and preserving the principle of
non-proliferation. One way of doing this could be to give
more attention to the interplay between the first two pillars
of the NPT and the fact that a sound non-proliferation regime
is also one of the decisive preconditions for nuclear
disarmament and getting closer to a world free of nuclear
weapons.
North Korea’s continuous and accelerating development of its
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes is the most
blatant threat to the nuclear non-proliferation regime
enshrined in the NPT to date. DPRK has carried out 5 nuclear
tests so far and continues to launch ballistic missiles and
satellites, thereby violating various UN Security Council
resolutions which have called on Pyongyang to dismantle its
nuclear programme, prohibited satellite launches and
requested North Korea to refrain from ballistic missile test.
North Korea must refrain from further nuclear testing, cease
immediately all nuclear activities and launches using ballistic
missile technology, and abandon all nuclear weapons and
ballistic missile programmes “ in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner” as required by the relevant UN Security
Council resolutions. Urgent action is necessary to increase the
pressure on Pyongyang to enter into negotiations and to start
addressing the tremendous international concerns about
DPRK’s illegal nuclear activities. It is key that all diplomatic
efforts should aim at the peaceful denuclearization of the

2

Korean Peninsula and fully restore the principle of nonproliferation and respect for the NPT.
Even before 2003, DPRK had not been in good standing with
the NPT. Many of the problems evolved around DPRK’s noncompliance with the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement it
had concluded with the IAEA in 1992. We strongly urge DPRK
to promptly return to compliance with the NPT and its IAEA
Safeguards Agreement and allow for the return of IAEA
inspectors.
It almost goes without saying that a robust nuclear nonproliferation system is based on the IAEA’s safeguards system
and its effective implementation. The IAEA must have
adequate resources and political support to fulfil its
safeguards mandates. One of the expectations of the last
Review Cycle which has not been fulfilled is to have NPT
members decide to strengthen the non-proliferation regime
by promoting an IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
together with an Additional Protocol as the international
verification standard, which should be considered when
deciding on the supply of nuclear fuel, equipment or
technology. We call on all States who have not yet done so to
sign and bring into force an Additional Protocol and, where
relevant, adopt the modified Small Quantities Protocols.
As the case of North Korea underscores, Germany also
continues to see the need for arriving at a common

3

understanding of States parties on how to respond effectively
to a State party’s withdrawal from the NPT based on Art. X.
Turning to the accomplishments of the non-proliferation
pillar, substantial progress was achieved regarding the Iranian
nuclear issue during the last NPT Review Cycle: The
diplomatic agreement reached between the E3/EU+3 and
Iran in July 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPoA), put an end to a decade-long nuclear dispute with
Iran within the logic of the NPT. The JCPoA presents a rare
success of diplomacy in a very volatile region: All possible
paths to a nuclear bomb for Iran were blocked. Bear in mind:
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was never called into
question during the negotiations between the E3/EU+3 and
Iran. On the contrary: All delegations were clear that the NPT
was and had to be the basis of all endeavours.
The JCPoA is not built on trust but on verification: The IAEA’s
role in monitoring the agreement and reporting to the Board
and its Member States is crucial for the building of trust and
confidence and for the implementation of the measures
related to the relief and lifting of sanctions which the JCPoA
foresees in return. Verification is a prerequisite for the buildup and maintenance of trustful relations. The Additional
Protocol with its widened scope of inspections whose
application by Iran is one important, but – pending
ratification - voluntary element of the JCPoA should become
the universal gold standard for each and every state.
4

We reaffirm our strong support for the IAEA’s ongoing efforts
to verify Iran’s compliance with its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPoA. Germany has made available
4.1 Mio. EUR for nuclear verification in Iran (Geneva Joint
Plan of Action and JCPOA) so far and commends those states
which have equally contributed financially to the crucial
monitoring and verification work of the IAEA in Iran so far.

Unfortunately, there is little progress to report with regard to
the Syrian case of non-compliance. Germany deplores Syria’s
ongoing non-compliance with its nuclear safeguards
obligations. In light of the disastrous security situation in
Syria, concerns about the security of Syria’s nuclear assets in
terms of material and equipment are high. Syria should
cooperate fully with the IAEA by providing access to the
information, documentation, sites, material and personnel in
Syria that the Agency has requested.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Syria’s unresolved nuclear issues in the face of ongoing civil
war showcast the risks and challenges emanating from the
threat of nuclear terrorism, the proliferation of WMD and
regional conflicts. All this adds up to a dangerous
combination which needs to be addressed with resolve. We
must be aware of these challenges to maintain a sufficient
level of nuclear security. No one should assume that the
threat only concerns those who actually use nuclear energy.
5

Terrorism does not respect borders. So-called failed states
add to the risks of nuclear materials falling out of regulatory
control.
The Nuclear Security Summit process has drawn global
attention to these challenges. Germany contributed to the
process in the field of improving security of radioactive
sources and the protection from cyber attacks against nuclear
facilities. Much work needs still to be done. We welcome the
IAEA’s readiness to fulfill its central role with respect to
nuclear security and hope that the momentum can be
maintained also in the NPT context.
Ladies and gentlemen,

last but not least a few comments on the question of a zone
free of nuclear weapons, as well as other WMD and their
means of delivery in the Middle East. Germany remains
committed to the objective of a Middle East free of WMD and
their means of delivery and stands by the pertinent decisions
taken in the context of the NPT, notably in the 2010 Action
Plan. Germany commends ongoing efforts of the co-sponsors
of the 1995 Resolution (the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom and the United States) and the League of Arab
States on this issue. Germany strongly regrets that, despite
these persistent efforts, it has thus far not been possible to
convene the Conference. As stated in the 2010 Final
Document, it is a prerequisite for a successful meeting that
6

the regional parties engage freely and actively with each
other in order to reach consensus on a date and an agenda
for the Conference.

Thank you!

7

