Please check against delivery

Statement by
Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia

at the First Preparatory Committee Meeting
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 2: Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, safeguards
and nuclear-weapon-free zones

Vienna, 2 – 12 May 2017

0

Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia associates itself with the statement delivered in this Cluster by
the Non-Aligned Movement Parties to the NPT, and its relevant working
papers.
Indonesia reiterates our support for the balanced implementation of the
three pillars of the NPT, which have been the main foundations of the
Treaty. Achieving the impartial application as mandated in the Treaty
should and will always be in our mindset in accomplishing a world free of
nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, while the non-proliferation commitment has continuously
been fulfilled by non-nuclear weapon states, over the years, nuclear
weapon states have not met their obligation under Article VI and still
possess nuclear weapons in their arsenal.
The partial fulfillment of either non-proliferation or disarmament pillars
will not only erode the credibility of the Treaty, but also endanger world
peace and security.
With this in mind, Indonesia attaches great importance on rebalancing
these two commitments by full compliance of nuclear disarmament by
nuclear weapon states without conditions. While reiterating its
commitment to nuclear nonproliferation, Indonesia also reaffirms the
right of all parties to the Treaty to develop, research, produce, and use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination.
Notwithstanding the continued imbalance between the pillars of the
Treaty, for more than 40 years NPT has become the cornerstone of
global non-proliferation regime.
The success of non-proliferation cannot be separated from the
application of safeguards by the IAEA. Comprehensive safeguards
agreements established under the NPT, and strengthened by Additional
Protocols, have proven to be a successful tool to provide credible
assurance on the absence of undeclared nuclear materials or facilities in
NNWS.
1

In this connection, Indonesia strongly underlines that the universalization
of Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and strengthening
safeguards measures through the application of Additional Protocol will
provide sustainable method of addressing non-proliferation. Indonesia
calls upon all nuclear-weapon States and all States not party to the
Treaty to place all their nuclear facilities under IAEA full-scope
safeguards. Indonesia also highlights the statutory role and capability of
IAEA on verifying nuclear disarmament, including applying safeguards
on nuclear materials derived from the dismantling of nuclear weapons.
While recognizing the Agency’s authority in applying safeguards, my
delegation stresses that the work of IAEA in this regard should be in
accordance with its Statute and safeguards agreements; impartial and
free from political interference.
My delegation is of the view that the development and implementation of
State-level approaches requires close consultation and coordination with
the State, and should be done under the consent of the Agency’s policymaking organs. In accordance with the IAEA GC 59 and 60 resolutions
on safeguards, my delegation looks forward to the Secretariat’s report
on progress made and lessons learned in the development and
implementation of State-level approaches.
Mr. Chairman,
With regard to the nuclear-weapon-free zones, Indonesia believes that
these efforts are essential in our collective works of creating a nuclearweapon-free world. The NWFZ have an important part in promoting
confidence among countries in the region that their neighbors are not
pursuing nuclear weapons.
Moreover, NWFZs provide an effective means for preventing nuclear
test being conducted in a region, and at the same time reaffirm the
inalianable right of parties to the NWFZ to activities of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.

2

Indonesia is a party to the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone
Treaty or Bangkok Treaty, which entered into force in 1997. For more
than 20 years, Indonesia and countries in South East Asia region have
enjoyed stability, peace and security derived from Bangkok Treaty.
However, these circumstances and for all objectives of NWFZ to be fully
achieved require not only commitment and trust from all parties to the
Treaty, but also supports from nuclear weapon states.
In this regard, we stress the importance of consultations between
nuclear weapon states and parties to the Bangkok Treaty for the early
accession of the nuclear weapon states to the protocol of the Bangkok
Treaty. Nuclear weapon states and members of ASEAN should continue
to sharpen its focus of collaboration to resolve comprehensively, in
accordance with the objective and principle of the Bangkok Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia has always supported the establishment of nuclearweaponfree zones and calls for the realization of such zones.
In this context, we express our deep concern over the slow progress of
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It is
high time that measures put forward by countries in the Middle East for
almost 40 years come to fruition, as a matter of priority towards
strengthening NPT regime as a whole.
We wish that this meeting would provide momentum to further political
will by States in the region to launch negotiations at the earliest possible
date, on a treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East in accordance with the provisions of the NPT and the decisions of
its Review Conferences, as well as the Final Document of the First
Special Session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, and
the guidelines and principles adopted by the United Nations
Disarmament Commission in 1999.
I thank you.

3

4

