﷽
Statement by
Head of the Delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran
H. E. Ambassador Reza Najafi
Permanent Representative to the UN and other International organizations in Vienna
Cluster II: Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee of 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 30 April 2018
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to associate my delegation with the Non-Aligned Movement’s statement on
this cluster.
The Islamic Republic of Iran as a steadfast supporter of the nuclear disarmament
objective is firmly committed to the nuclear nonproliferation objective. From our perspective,
the objective of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons derives its legitimacy from the larger
objective of nuclear disarmament. As clarified in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference, the overwhelming majority of States entered into legally binding commitments not
to receive, manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons in the context, inter alia, of the
corresponding legally binding commitments by the nuclear-weapon States to nuclear
disarmament.
We believe that the best way to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its
aspects is the full and effective implementation of the terms of articles I, II, III and VI of the
Treaty and universal adherence to the Treaty.
It is a matter of satisfaction that with the full compliance by the non-nuclear-weapon
States with their non-proliferation and safeguards commitments under articles II and III of the
Treaty the objective of preventing further nuclear weapon proliferation has been achieved.
However, this achievement has not led to making parallel progress towards the attainment of
the nuclear disarmament objective because of the non-compliance by certain nuclear-weapons
States with their unequivocal nuclear disarmament commitments. We share the concern that
the continuation of this obvious imbalance in the implementation of the non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament undertakings presents a serious threat to the credibility and legitimacy of
the Treaty.

1

As long as the nuclear weapons exist, the risk of their proliferation both vertically and
horizontally will persist. This is the lesson learned of the history of nuclear proliferation which
began with the development, testing and use of nuclear weapons by the United States during
the World War II and prompted a chain reaction of proliferation of such weapons. The most
effective guarantee against the proliferation of nuclear weapons is the total elimination of such
weapons and maintenance of a world free of nuclear weapons backed by a strong verification
and monitoring system which makes the acquisition of nuclear weapons impossible for any
state.
Under the terms of article I of the Treaty, the nuclear-weapon States are committed not
to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or control over such weapons and not
in any way to assist any non-nuclear-weapon States to control over such weapons. Accordingly,
they should refrain from nuclear-weapon sharing, under any kind of security arrangements,
among themselves, with the non-nuclear-weapon States parties and those not parties to the
Treaty.
Nuclear-weapon-sharing of any kind is a clear violation of the explicit obligations under
articles I and II of the Treaty. By transferring hundreds of nuclear weapons to certain NATO
non-nuclear-weapon States, the United States of America, for a long time, has been in noncompliance with its obligation, under article I of the Treaty. We call on the U.S. to move
promptly to full compliance with its Treaty obligations on non-proliferation by terminating
nuclear-weapon-sharing arrangements and withdrawing all its tactical nuclear weapons that are
stationed in the territories of certain NATO non-nuclear-weapon States. Furthermore, we urge
the NATO non-nuclear-weapon States to renounce their participation in the NATO’s nuclearsharing arrangement because such arrangement runs contrary to the letter and spirit of the
NPT and the objective of nuclear disarmament.
Universal adherence to the Treaty is essential in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The universality of the Treaty is of utmost importance in a region such as the Middle
East, where the nuclear weapons program of the Israeli regime remains a source of nuclearweapon proliferation in the region and presents the most serious threat to the security and
stability in the region. The nuclear non-proliferation norm should be applied globally and
without exception.
Israel’s nuclear weapons program is the result of the application of double standards by
certain nuclear-weapon States, in particular the United States and their failing to abide by the
non-proliferation norm that they are legally committed to comply with. They oppose the
acquisition and development of nuclear weapons by some States, but ignore the nuclear
weapons programs of their allies that are outside the NPT and even have nuclear cooperation
with them.
2

The 2020 Review Conference should call on all States parties for the total and complete
prohibition of nuclear cooperation with, and the transfer of all nuclear facilities, resources or
devices to, the Israeli regime.
The decision of the Nuclear Suppliers Group to allow nuclear cooperation between its
members and a non-party to the Treaty is another manifestation of double standards and
discrimination in implementing the NPT’s non-proliferation norm. That decision made in
complete disregard of the principle 12 adopted in 1995 by the Review and Extension
Conference and reaffirmed in 2000 by the Review Conference (paragraph 36 of the Final
Document), according to which acceptance of the IAEA’s full-scope safeguards and
internationally legally binding commitments not to acquire nuclear weapons is a necessary
precondition for the transfer of nuclear material or equipment. Such actions and decisions have
significantly undermined the prospects for achieving the universality of the Treaty.
Non-proliferation measures, including the IAEA’s safeguards-strengthening measures
and nuclear-related export control measures, must be consistent with the inalienable right of
all States parties, without discrimination, to develop, acquire and use nuclear technology,
equipment and materials for the peaceful uses and to participate in peaceful nuclear
cooperation.
The implementation of comprehensive safeguards agreements pursuant to article III of
the Treaty provides assurance of compliance by non-nuclear-weapon States with their
nonproliferation and safeguards undertakings. Notwithstanding such assurances, various
restrictive measures and initiatives continue to be applied to limit the inalienable right to
peaceful nuclear development and participation in peaceful nuclear cooperation. Such
constraints are inconsistent with the Treaty as they jeopardize the full exercise of the
inalienable right of the States parties to apply and develop their programs for the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, and therefore, must be eliminated.
Thank you

3

