Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations
28, chemin du Petit-Sacomex / 1709 Geneva

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merci$ul
Statement
By H.E. Ambassador Aii Asghar Soltanieh
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the IAEA and other International Organizations in Vienna
at the Second Session of the NPT Preparatory Committee
Cluster 11- on Non-Proliferation
Geneva, 29 April 2013

Mr. Chairman,
I would like to associate my delegation with the statement delivered by the distinguished
representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement on this cluster.
The first and the most important short message is : Non- proliferation should not be dealt with

in isolation. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are two sides of the coin. Under the
pretext of "Non-proliferation", the Nuclear Weapon States have derailed the attention of
international community from their continuous nuclear armament. The 4-decade failure of
WT, non-compliance of Article VI, as well as Article IV on undertakings to cooperate in

peaceful use of nuclear energy, proves this assertion.
As long as nuclear weapons exist, there is always a risk for their use and vertical or horizontal
proliferation. By maintaining nuclear arsenals and their horizontal proliferation through the
transfer of nuclear technologies and weapons-grade materials to non-parties to the Treaty, the
nuclear-weapon States have also contributed to the emergence of new nuclear weapons
possessors. It is considered as a clear violation of non-proliferation obligations under article I
of the Treaty by the certain nuclear weapon states. Therefore non proliferation shall not be
attributed only to the non-nuclear weapon states. History shows that nuclear proliferation has
happened as the result of the development, testing and use of nuclear weapons by the United
States in the past and in the present. Today the existence of tens of thousands of nuclear

weapons and the risk to use them constitute the greatest threat to the human civilization and the
peace and security of all. Given such threats and risks, nothing can justify the possession of
nuclear weapons by a small group of States.
Against this backdrop, the compliance by non-nuclear-weapon States with their commitment to
non-proliferation has greatly enabled the NPT to prevent the horizontal spread of nuclear
weapons. As a matter of fact, peaceful nuclear activities of the non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the Treaty as long as they are under the full scope safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) pose no proliferation risks. Therefore as a responsible nonnuclear-weapon State, the Islamic Republic of Iran, having exclusively peacehl nuclear
activities is strongly committed to the non-proliferation objective of the NPT in all its aspects.
We are of the view that full. and non-discriminatory implementation of the NPT plays an
essential role in enhancing international peace and security. We are far behind implementation
of the provisions of the NPT in a balanced manner. To this end my delegation proposes that the
20 15 NPT Review Conference should, inter alia:

- To call upon the Nuclear Weapon States to fully implement their obligations under
article VI of the Treaty on total elimination of their nuclear weapons.

-

To establish a strong mechanism to verify the implementation of article I by the Nuclear
Weapon States, regarding the transfer of nuclear material and technology to non-nuclear
weapon states.

-

To make a decision on the prohibition of any nuclear assistance to non-parties to the
Treaty.

-

To identify cases of non-compliance by the Nuclear Weapon States with their
obligations under the Treaty, specifically with Article-I, and to find ways and means
how to deal with such violations including preventive measures.

Let me further elaborate on the alarming facts as well as the main tasks presumed for the 2015
Review Conference as highlighted above:

One of the major challenges facing the NPT is the cases of non-compliance by US, UK, and
France with their Treaty obligations including the non-proliferation provisions. While there is
an established mechanism to verifl and enforce the obligations under Articles I1 and I11 of the
Treaty for the non-nuclear-weapon States, no similar mechanism has been designed to
internationally verify and address the non-compliances by the Nuclear Weapon States with
their obligations under Articles I, I11 (2), IV (2) and VI of the NPT.
Under the tenns of the article I of the Treaty, the Nuclear Weapon States are committed not to
transfer nuclear weapons or nuclear-weapon technology and materials to others. Accordingly,
the Nuclear Weapon States should rekain fiom nuclear sharing, under any kind of security
arrangements, among themselves, with non-nuclear-weapon States Parties and those not parties
to the Treaty. Full materialization of non-proliferation objective requires the implementation of
article I of the Treaty by the Nuclear Weapon States. Therefore, the Review Conference should
establish a strong mechanism to verify the implementation of article I by the Nuclear Weapon
States.

By transferring hundreds of nuclear weapons to certain non-nuclear-weapon States under the
NATO umbrella in the EU territories, the US, for a long time, has been in non-compliance with
its obligations under the Treaty, which provides in its article I "not to transfer to any recipient
whatsoever nuclear weapons." The deployed tactical nuclear weapons in the EU countries are
extrzmely integrated into the military infkastmcture of the hosting countries, the fighter bomber
pilots of the hosting countries have been trained to handle and deliver the United States nuclear
bombs against the nuclear as well as the non-nuclear-weapon States. It constitutes clear noncompliance with the Treaty not only by sending country but also by the hosting States namely
some members of the European Union. We call upon the US and the EU to come back into
compliance with their Treaty obIigations and abandoned double-standard and discriminatory
policies.
The IAEA has to verify safeguards obligations of the European countries hosting US nuclear
weapons in their territories. The Director General of the IAEA has to report the detailed
information on weapon grade nuclear material, including high enriched weapons and

plutonium, their locations and contiguous accountancy of material balance. In this context Iran
propose to all like minded non-nuclear weapon states party to NPT to pursue this in the IAEA.
The Agency shall report to the next prepcorn and the Review Conference a progress report.

By the same token, France, the US and the UK by transfer of nuclear technologies and
materials to non-parties to the Treaty including the Zionist regime of Israel, not only have
created impediments towards achievement of universality of the Treaty but also have greatly
contributed to the emergence of new nuclear weapon possessors. This is a clear breach of nonproliferation obligation under article I of the Treaty, particularly by France as the founder of
Israeli secret nuclear program.
The unprecedented decision of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), an exclusive and
nontransparent club that claims to have been established so as to strengthen the nonproliferation regime, has already damaged the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Such a decision, by
facilitating the transfer of nuclear material to a non-party that has an active nuclear-weapons
programme, is a clear violation of article 111 (2) of the Treaty, which stipulates that cooperation
by each State party to the Treaty in providing equipment or material for peacehl purposes is
not permitted unless the source or special fissionable material is subjected to the safeguards
required under the Treaty. The NSG decision, which was made under pressure exerted by the

US and supported by the EU members, is also a violation of the commitment of the Nuclear
Weapon States under the decision on principles and objectives of the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Treaty and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference
for promoting universalization of the Treaty. When a country outside the Treaty easily and
unconditionally enjoys nuclear assistance from NSG members, it will never have incentives to
accede to the Treaty. The Review Conference should make a decision on the prohibition of any
nuclear assistance to non-parties to the Treaty.
Furthermore, it seems that in the view of a few nuclear weapon States and the EU members,
clandestine development of nuclear weapons by those outside the Treaty is justifiable, and that
such a nuclear programme can be supported through cooperation and transferring nuclear
technology, material and equipment. It is a matter of great concern that such an approach has
been applied by the United States and the EU to the underground nuclear weapons programme

of the Israeli regime. Permitting such a regime to continue to produce nuclear weapons with
impunity will bring about grave consequences for regional and international peace and
security.
To this effect, the outcome of the 2015 Review Conference, based on the h l l implementation
of the obligations of the Nuclear Weapon States on non-proliferation, should be designed in a
wiiy to cover several key issues as follows:
(a) The proliferation by certain nuclear-weapon States is the most immediate and essential risk
threatening the non-proliferation regime;
(b) Article I of the Treaty and its implementation by the Nuclear Weapon States should be
strengthened by establishing a verification mechanism similar to the one under article III of the
Treaty;
(c) It is essential that all proliferation cases made by certain Nuclear Weapon States be

thoroughly examined by the IAEA;

(d) The Nuclear Weapon States must reiterate their commitment not to transfer any nuclear
material, equipment, information, knowledge and technology to them;
(e) Undeniable interrelation between non-proliferation and disarmament has to be reaffirmed

and ways and means for their practical intertwined impacts be identified and actions to that end

be adopted.

Mr. Chairman,

I have to warn that the extension of full nuclear cooperation to non-parties, exemption from
strict export regulations of nuclear material and technology, such as NSG, which is an
indication of admiration for non-adherence to the NPT, is a crystal clear non-compliance of the
non-proliferation provisions of the Treaty by western countries specifically the US and the EU.

In the meantime their hostile policy turning the NPT forum into a battlefield against parties to

NPT, as we normally witnessed, are clear evidences of double standard policy, lack of any
valuable principle. The last but not the least the instrumental use of Board of Governor of the
IAEA and the United Nations Security Council, followed by political pressures and sanctions
against parties to the NPT have serious consequences for the integrity and universality of the

NPT, a spectrum fiom discouragement to withdrawal. The 2015 Review Conference has to
deal with such serious threats to the Treaty and to address the non-compliances of western
countries, with provision of non-proliferation.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government, I declare that the Islamic Republic of Iran is filly
committed to NPT and the comprehensive safeguards agreement (INFCIRC/214) and considers
the IAEA, as the sole competent authority in verifjling nuclear activities of the states parties to
the NPT. Iran already discouraged the US and couple of other western countries,
miscalculating by anticipation, perhaps hopes, that Iran will withdraw the NPT after the
involvement of the UN Security Council and imposing sanctions. The Islamic Republic of Iran
is committed to principles which prevented it Erom retaliating Saddam by chemical weapons
despite losing thousands of love ones as chemical weapon victims.
The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to be active party to NPT and member state of the

IAEA is hlly determined to challenge violations by specifically few western countries, remedy
the treaty shortcomings, and put both the IAEA and the NPT back in right track.

I thank you Mr. Chairman.

