

Mr. Chairman, 
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you on your election for else chairmanship of this important committee. I would like to reaffirm the full cooperation of my delegation with you reach the recommendations which realize the objectives of the NPT. 
Mr. Chairman, 
First, we meet today to review the implementation of the Treaty between 1995 until this year. Therefore, we should confirm ourselves to this principle and refrain from raising past events in a distorted and disfigured manner to serve political purposes. The raising of the events of 1991 concerning Iraq in a biased manner will impede the committee from dealing with its function and will not serve any of the noble goals for which we are meeting to bring about today. 
Second, Iraq is in full compliance with its commitments in accordance with the NPT and its safeguards regime and the visit by the IAEA inspection group to Iraq in January of this year is the best proof of this. The IAEA has reaffirmed Iraq's full cooperation with its inspectors and that they verified all the nuclear material that Iraq has in its possession and the result were fully compliant with the agency's inventory. 
Hence, anyone who demands that Iraq complies with the IAEA safeguards regime is either ignorant or ignoring the facts. I had hoped that instead of repeating erroneous information on Iraq, to question how a state which is a depository of the NPT, the United States of America, opens its nuclear laboratories to visits by the scientists and experts of Israel that is not a party to the NPT. This agreement I am referring to was signed this year during the preparations for this review conference. 
Third, concerning the reference to the relationship of Iraq with the Security Council, this a purely political matter and is not relevant to Iraq's obligation is accordance with the NPT and the safeguards regime. If some persist to raise the issue of the relationship of Iraq with the Security Council, then, what is required that this reference should be comprehensive and deals with ail aspects of the relationship and particularly what follows: 
1- The activities of the IAEA according to restriction 687(1991) were used to conduct espionage on Iraq, starting from the activities of David Kay who directly transmitted to Washington all the information which he obtained from the inspection activities in Iraq and ending with the inspection and monitoring activities conducted by the IAEA which were carried out in coordination with the now defunct UNSCOM, headed by its Australian Chief, the ill reputed, Richard Butler. The inspectors themselves admitted that they conducted espionage for Israeli and U.S. intelligence services. The UN Secretary General did not deny this, nor did the U.S. The use of the IAEA as a cover or guise for espionage has undermined the credibility of the IAEA and the UN. We call upon the IAEA to investigate this scandal and to report to the state parties to the NPT the results of any such investigation. Will this committee then make recommendations to this effect? 
2- The IAEA has withdrawn its monitoring and inspection team from Iraq since 15 December 1998, upon instructions from the Australian Chief of UNSCOM, Richard Butler, in contravention of its working procedures and its mandate and without informing the Security Council. 
Those who refer to the halting of the IAEA' activities since 16 December 1998 should mention these facts, if they want to be objection and deal with the causes and results of this act. 
3- Two states, depositories of the NPT, the US and the UK, have conducted air strikes against sites subject to the monitoring regime of the IAEA, hours after the departure of the .Agency's inspectors from these sites, thus destroying these sites and the monitoring equipment, such as cameras and sensors which the inspectors left behind. This act of aggression, in addition to being an illegal use of force, without the authorization of the Security Council, had struck a fatal blow to the IAEA's monitoring regime in Iraq. Do we then expect this committee to condemn this aggression which targets the IAEA's monitoring regime and prevent their repetition and compensate Iraq for damages resulting from such aggressions? 
4- The US and UK have used depleted uranium munitions to strike Iraq in contravention of their obligations in accordance with the NPT. These weapons were used once again against Yugoslavia in 1999. Depleted uranium munitions are a use of radioactive weapons, a matter which have led to the taking of thousands Iraqi civilians, particularly children, who have suffered different forms of cancer and particularly leukemia. Do we expect the committee to recommend a prohibition on the use of depleted uranium in warfare, and recommend compensation for Iraq as well as a mission to clear the environment from this crime against humanity? 
5- Since some members of the committee insist on looking buckboards, I would like to point out that worst strike against the safeguards regime was Israel's aggression in 1981 on the Iraqi nuclear reactor used solely for peaceful purposes. The Security Council called upon Israel in its resolution 487(1981) to subject its nuclear facilities to the IAEA's safeguards regime. But this resolution has not been implemented and is no more than ink on paper. Do we expect this committee to be fair to Iraq and recommend a prohibition on aggression against nuclear facilities subject to the IAEA's safeguards regime and to compensate Iraq for the damages resulting from this aggression? 
6- Paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687(1991) mentioned that the steps taken by Iraq are only steps in establishing a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East. Until now, this paragraph remains unimplemented. Do we then expect the committee to recommend that Israel subject its nuclear facilities to the safeguard regime, in preparation for the establishment of the Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in the Middle East? 
Finally, we hope that the work of this committee, in fact this Review Conference, an opportunity to review the current shortcomings and imbalances in order to remedy them and look to the future with a united and a collective will, which promotes the credibility of the NPT and its safeguards regime and brings closer to true universality. 
Some members continue to persist in making Iraq a scapegoat to cover the shortcomings and imbalances in the implementation of the NPT. If such trends persists, my delegation will submit specific recommendations to the Committee. 
Thank you. 

