Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I1
Statement by Mr. Gerard Keown,
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland

Mr. Chairman,
I

Ireland aligns itself with the statement by the European Union under this cluster.
The non-proliferation pillar of the NPT, and the related actions which we all agreed to in
2010, stand between us and a nuclear weapons free-for-all. We have consistently argued for
a balanced implementation across all three pillars and we attach equal importance, therefore,
to the non-proliferation provisions of the NPT. We must protect this pillar. The Treaty has
stemmed the wide scale horizontal proliferation which would undoubtedly have ensued in the
absence of an NPT, and we are strongly committed to ftlrthering the objectives of this pillar
of the Treaty, both on its own merits and as a contribution to the goal of disarmament.

a

j

In addressing the non-proliferation pillar of the Treaty within the terms of the 2010 Action
Plan, it will be important for us to reaffirm the central importance of the IAEA safeguards
system to the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We must each continue to exert all efforts to
promote universal adherence to the NPT, as set out in Action 23 of the Action Plan, and to
consider how we can advance the universalisation of compreheiisive safeguards as a means of
ensuring compliance with the Treaty's objectives, as set out in Action 29. We of course urge
those states which have not yet done so to bring into force compreheilsive safeguards
agreements and the Additional Protocol as sooil as possible.
Ireland welcomes the lorthcoining IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security in July
2013 and we encourage NPT States Parties to support this initiative. Wc also encourage all
States to talce effective action to implement the provisioils of UNSCR 1540.
Together with our fellow member of the Viemla Group of 10, Ireland has proposed a number
of working papers to this Preparatory Committee on compliance and verification; on the
CTBT; on export controls; on nuclear safety and on nuclear security. We trust that these
submissions will contribute to the work of this conference and to our joint work
implementing this pillar of the Treaty.

Ireland and its EU partners are subject to a conlprehensive Codc of Conduct on military and
dual use exports which requires that export licences should be refused if approval would be
inconsistent with, inter alia, the NPT. We believe that the Code of Conduct represents one of
the strongest export control regimes in the world.
Together with many States present here, Ireland is an active participant in a number of export
control regimes whose aim is to counter, curb and prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons technology, material or know-how.
As an exporter of dual use goods, for example, Ireland participates in the Nuclear Suppliers
Group and the Zangger Committee. In line with Action 36 of the Action Plan, these
arrangements, as well as other regimes such as the Hague Code of Conduct and the Missile
Technology Control Regime in which we also actively participate, are important practical
elements of the non-proliferation regime built around the NPT.
It is important that our export controls arrangements continue to facilitate transfers of
technology and equipment for peaceful uses, in conformity with Articles 1, IS, I11 and IV of
the Treaty. To do this, however, and as Action 35 stipulates, we must be in a position to
ensure that such exports do not directly or indirectly facilitate the dcvelop~nentof nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. We talte our responsibilities in this area
seriously, and we encourage other States to do so as well.
We take equally seriously our obligation to speak up when the non-proliferation
commitments ofthe Treaty are not being met.
Mr. Chairman,
The DPRIC represents the most serious nuclear proliferation challenge racing us today and we
condemn and deplore the recent weapons and missile testing by Pyongyang. We call upon
the DPRK to desist from any further provocative actions and to return to full compliance with
its obligations under the NPT and its IAEA safeguards agreement. It is essential that the
international community remains unified and resolute in its opposition to nuclear weapons
proliferation. We must continue to urge the DPRK to re-engage in talks on the denuclearisation of the Scorean peninsula, immediately and without pre-conditions.
We deplore Syria's undeclared steps towards a nuclear reactor, as set out in a succession of
IAEA reports since 2010. We are deeply concerned about recent reports of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, allegations which merit the strongest possible condemnation and
the fullest investigation. We call on Syria to cooperate fully with the IAEA and the UN on
both these issues. In the context of our discussions here, we call on the Syrian authorities to
take steps immediately to comply with their commitments under their NPT Safeguards
Agreement, to cooperate fully and transparently with the IAEA and to sign and ratify the
Additional Protocol as soon as possible.
We call on Iran to address the concerns of the IAEA and the wider international community
regarding its nuclear programme. These are legitimate questions for Iran to answer and we
call on it to do so. We recognise the entitlement of any NPT State Party to the peaceful uses

of nuclear technology. In order to do so, however, States must demonstrate that they meet
the minimum requirements, the benchmark of which is the IAEA safeguards system. Iran
asserts its entitlement to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the NPT. We expect it,
therefore, to meet its obligations under the Treaty. This means complying with UN Security
Council and IAEA Resolutions on Iran. We also encourage the Iranian authorities to engage
fully, openly and constructively in its dialogue with the E3+3, building on the recent
meetings in Almaty.
Mr Chairman,
Ireland has always placed a particular emphasis on disarmament as a ltey driver of any
concerted effort towards a world free of nuclear weapons. We cannot fail to notice a
regrettably faniliar ring to the language of deterrence with which the DPRK attempts to
justify its efforts to develop nuclear weapons. We remain firmly of the view that progress on
disarmament would remove any possible perceived incentive for a State to respond to a
nuclear weapons capability by developing its own retaliatory capability. The conviction that
there is an inseparable link between the goals of disarmame~~t
and non-proliferation was one
of the reasons behind the formation of the New Agenda Coalition and we remain as
convinced of this today as we were fifteen years ago.
We fear that failure to act on disarmament undermines the NPT's undoubted achievements on
non-proliferation. Let us be resolute, therefore, in advancing both sets of provisions, hand-inhand.

