(Please check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. TOSHIO SANO，
AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY AND PLENIPOTENTIARY,
DELEGATION OF JAPAN TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT, GENEVA

THIRD SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

- CLUSTER II NEW YORK, 1 MAY 2014

1

Mr. Chairman,

At the last NPT Review Conference in 2010, it was recognized that the
inalienable right of all the parties to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes constitutes one of the fundamental
objectives of the Treaty. This being the case, Japan believes that robust
non-proliferation efforts by the international community as a whole are
imperative so that we can promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while
minimizing the threats posed by nuclear proliferation. To this end, as shown
in

our

working

paper

‘Strengthening

International

Nuclear

Non-Proliferation’ submitted to this session of the Preparatory Committee,
Japan supports the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system and of
export controls as well as other related mechanisms.

Mr. Chairman,

The IAEA safeguards isa fundamental component of the international
non-proliferation

regime. Japan

is

determined to

promote various

endeavours to further strengthen the IAEA safeguards. We will continue to
work with the international community for the universalization of the IAEA
comprehensivesafeguards agreements and additional protocols. We will
strive to make concrete contributions in such field as providing assistance
to countries that need to establish national systems for safeguards
implementation,

training

inspectors
2

for

the

next

generation,

the

institutionalization of knowledge and the research and development of
safeguards technologies.

Japan welcomes the fact that the number of states with an additional
protocol in force has been steadily increased since the 2010 NPT Review
Conference. This trend of wider adherence to additional protocols makes it
more convincing that the IAEA safeguards reinforced by the additional
protocol should be the safeguards standard in accordance with paragraph 1
of Article III of the NPT. In this connection, Japan calls on all states to apply
this safeguards standard, i.e. a comprehensive safeguards agreement
reinforced by an additional protocol, as a condition for supplying nuclear
material, equipment and technology to a recipient country, and to
incorporate this condition in their civil nuclear cooperation agreements.

Japan considers it imperative that all States provide support to the IAEA so
that the IAEA is able to maintain sufficient capabilities to fully discharge its
responsibilities in an effective and efficient manner.

Mr. Chairman,

Export controls play a critical role in meeting the nuclear non-proliferation
obligations prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT. Given the
necessity of counter-terrorism measures and the increasing complexity of
illicit procurement activities, Japan will continue to actively assist other
3

states in their efforts to strengthen export control systems including
through the Asian Export Control Seminar held annually in Japan since 1993,
by pointing out that export control creates a favorable environment for
further economic growth rather than impeding trade and investment.
Japan, recalling Action 36 of the last NPT Review Conference, encourages
State parties to refer to, and align with, the multilaterally negotiated and
agreed-upon guidelines and understandings on export controls. Japan is of
the view that states that utilize and align with existing guidelines such as the
Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines and the Zangger Committee Trigger List,
actually

find

merit

in

enhancing

their

export

transparency

and

competitiveness.

Mr. Chairman,

In order to effectively counter proliferation, Japan wishes to highlight the
importance of fully implementing United Nations Security Council
Resolution

1540,and

will

continue

to

support

its

smooth

implementationthrough the work of the UNSCR 1540 committee, and
through engagement in various regional seminars and workshops.

Mr. Chairman,

Regarding the establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones,

Japan

believes that this should be pursued on the basis of arrangements freely
4

arrived at among States of the region concerned and in accordance with the
1999 Guidelines of the United Nations Disarmament Commission. Japan
would also like to draw your attention to the relevant part of the NPDI Joint
Ministerial Statement issued in Hiroshima in April this year.

Thank you.

5

