To be checked against delivery

Statement by Ambassador Toshiro Ozawa,
Permanent Mission of Japan to the International Organizations in Vienna
Cluster 2
First Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
for the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
7 May 2012

Mr. Chairman,
At the last NPT Review Conference i n 2010, it was recognized that the
inalienable right of all the parties to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes constitutes one of the fundamental
objectives of the Treaty. At the same time, to our deep regret, the challenges
of nuclear proliferation continue to persist in several regions. This being the
case, J a p a n believes t h a t robust counter-proliferation efforts are needed by
the international community as a whole so that we can promote the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy while minimizing the threats posed by nuclear
proliferation. This is why J a p a n supports the strengthening of the IAEA
safeguards system and of export controls and also the regional efforts to
establish nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA safeguards system is the fundamental element i n the global
non-proliferation regime. It underpins the international security
environment and provides the basis for nuclear cooperation. Japan will
continue to promote the universalization of the comprehensive safeguards
agreement and the additional protocol. The full implementation of these
instruments will provide credible assurances regarding the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities, and thus enhance transparency
and build confidence.
J a p a n is fully committed to the working paper submitted to this Prep Com

by NPDI (Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative) on this matter and
welcomes other states supporting the elements of this working paper.
Japan, recalling Actions 28 and 29 agreed a t the last NPT Review
Conference in 2010, welcomes the fact that the number of states with the
additional protocol i n force increased from 101 to 115 i n the two years after
t h a t Conference. Japan highly values the efforts made by the IAEA i n this
regard. The trend showing such wider adherence to the additional protocols
makes it more convincing t h a n ever that the IAEA safeguards reinforced by
the additional protocol should be the safeguards standard i n accordance with
paragraph 1of Article I11 of the NPT. J a p a n calls on all states to apply this
safeguards standard 6.e. a comprehensive safeguards agreement reinforced
by a n additional protocol) a s a condition for their supply of nuclear material,
equipment and technology to the recipient country, and to incorporate this
condition i n their civil nuclear cooperation agreements. Such actions will
lead to a more secure and safer world.
J a p a n will continue to assist other states in their efforts to conclude the
additional protocol by sharing our own knowledge and experiences and by
working together with the IAEA and other states.
Japan, recalling Action 30 of the last Review Conference, supports the widest
possible application of IAEA safeguards to peaceful nuclear facilities i n the
nuclear weapon states to ensure irreversible and verifiable removal of
nuclear material designated by them a s no longer required for military
purposes.
J a p a n remains supportive of the ongoing effort by the IAEA Secretariat to
continue to improve efficiency and effectiveness i n safeguards
implementation through the use of a State-level approach. I n addition,
J a p a n reemphasizes the importance of wider application of the integrated
safeguards and hopes that such safeguards will be applied to as many states
as possible.
Japan considers it imperative, a s agreed i n Action 33 of the last NPT Review
Conference, t h a t all States provide support to the IAEA so that the IAEA is
able to maintain sufficient capabilities to fully discharge its responsibilities

i n a n effective and efficient manner.
Mr. Chairman,
Export controls play a critical role i n meeting the nuclear non-proliferation
obligations prescribed i n paragraph 2 of Article 111 of the NPT. Given the
necessity of counter-terrorism measures and the increasing complexity of
illicit procurement activities, the strengthening of export control systems has
become a n urgent matter for all of us. I n this context, J a p a n urges all State
parties to establish and implement effective export controls to prevent the
illicit transfer of nuclear and nuclear-related dual-use materials, equipment
and technologies. J a p a n will continue to actively assist other states i n their
efforts to strengthen export control systems through information sharing
and capacity building activities such as through the Asian Export Control
Seminar held annually i n J a p a n since 1993.
J a p a n encourages State parties to refer to, and align with the multilaterally
negotiated and agreed guidelines and understandings on export controls.
J a p a n is of the view that states that utilize and align with the existing
guidelines such a s the Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines and the Zangger
Committee Trigger List, actually find merit i n enhancing their export
transparency and competitiveness.
Mr. Chairman,
Ensuring proactive cooperation among all State parties is a key element i n
effectively countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including proliferation to non-state actors. To this end, J a p a n underlines the
importance of fully implementing United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1540, and will continue to support its smooth implementation
through the work of the UNSCR 1540 committee, a n d through engagement
i n various regional seminars and workshops.
Mr. Chairman,
Regarding the establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones, a s called
for i n Action 9 of the 2010 NPT Final Document, J a p a n believes that this

should be pursued on the basis of arrangements freely arrived a t among
States of the region concerned, and i n accordance with the 1999 Guidelines
of the United Nations Disarmament Commission. The establishment of such
zones does contribute to nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and global
and regional peace and security. I n this connection, Japan welcomes the
fact that intensive talks were held in New 'Ybrk recently between the five
nuclear-weapon states and the ASEAN countries on the ratification of the
protocol of the Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone.
J a p a n also supports the Resolution on the Middle East and efforts made by
Mr. Jaakko Laajava, the facilitator for the conference on the establishment of
a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. The Japanese delegation will make a separate statement on this
important issue tomorrow.
Thank you.

