Mr. Chairman,

•

My delegation associates itself with the statements made on behalf of both the
Group qf Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT and the Arab group.

•

The universal adherence to the Treaty and the creation of Nuclear-Weapon -Free
zones are important measures for strengthening global nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation,
and consequently lead to consolidating
peace and security, including the Middle East region.

international

•

In our region today however, one state continues to opt out of the NPT, and massive
imbalances in military capabilities continue to be maintained , particLJlarly through
the possession of nuclear weapons; thus, constitµting a constant threat to the
regional security and stability . It is therefore dismaying that no progress has been
achieved with regards to Israel's accession to the Treaty.

•

The nucle~r capabilities of Israel and the fact that its facilities remain outside the
scope of the IAEA's oversight constitute a threat both to regional and international
peace and security and to human safety. They make the establishment of a zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East a
priority for our region and for Jordan .

Mr . Chairman, ·
•

My delegation regrets that despite the numerous UN resolutions and review
Conference outcomes which affirmed the importance of the accession of Israel to
the Non-Proliferation
Treaty, and of placing all its nuclear facilities under
Comprehensive IAEA safeguards that no progress has been achieved on this issue.

•

My delegation also regrets the non-convening of the 2012 conference and
underlines that the establishment of the Zone should be undertaken in accordance
with the relevant UN resolutions and the implementation of commitments arrived at
in previous Review Conferences, particularly the 1995 resolution and the action plan
of the 2010 Review Conference, which served as the principal foundation for the
indefinite extension of the Treaty and which remains valid until its objectives are
fully achieved. in this context , the Conclusions and Recommendations for follow-up
actions of the 2010 Review represent an outcome that can be built upon and further
enhanced .

Mr. Chairman,
•

The failure of the 9th NPT Review Conference to reach consensus on a final outcome
document including consensus on new measures regarding the process to establish a
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East was an additional huge disappointment . This failure however should not
set us back in working towards achieving universal and regional adherence to the
NPT, and establishing the long awaited for zone.

•

This meeting and the upcoming 2020 Rev;Con should therefore come up with
concrete and urgent steps and measures for implementing its outcomes and
commitments on the Middle East Nuclear and WMD Zone, namely: the 1995
Resolution and the detailed plan of action on the Middle East, particularly on the
implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, as contained in the
conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions of the 2010 Review
Conference on the Middl~ East. It should also work on measures to convene the
2012 postponed conference on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

•

This meeting should also call on Israel to accede to the NPT without any delay or
preconditions as a non-nuclear weapon State, place all its nuclear facilities under the
IAEA's safeguards in accordance with Security Council Resolution 487 {1981) and
ensure that it undertake all its nuclear activities in full conformity with the NPT.

•

Finally, Mr. Chairman, we cannot afford wasting more time in establishing the zone
and in implementing our commitments to the NPT. What is at stake is not only the
credibility of decisions and outcomes of our review processes, or the NPT itself but
rather ensuring future security and stability for our region and protection against use
of such weapons or potential nuclear accidents but also peace and prosperity for our
all our peoples.

