Statement
by the Delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Geneva, April 30 - 'Ytay1, 2018)
Cluster 2 Specific Issue - Nonproliferation and
other Provisions of the Treaty

Mr. Chairman,
Kazakhstan's position on strengthening non-proliferation regime remains
firm, clear and w1changed. Significance of this issue is undeniable since nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are closely related and interdependent. It is our
conviction that all three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
\1/eapons should be respected and fully implemented.
Kazakhstan as one of the active States Parties to the NPT continues its
efforts aimed at creating favorable conditions for inelusive and multilateral
dialogue. Our country hosted various international fora devoted to nonproliferation and nuclear threat reduction problems.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Under the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT RevCon States Parties agreed on 23
items dealing with non-proliferation issues, and when compared to other actions
their fulfillment in this area can be described as satisfactory. However, failure of
NPT RevCon in 2015, and the latest developments in the world and the challenges
we are facing once again demonstrate that this track demands a more detailed look
from us.
In this respect, universaliz.ation of the 1'1'T remains as the highest priority in
preventing proliferation of nuclear threat as well as ensuring global peace and
fact that some states developing non-safeguarded nuclear
security. It is well h10w11
facilities still remain outside the NPT We do hope that current session will
generate new ideas and approaches towards accomplishment of this specific but
extremely vital work.
An early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
and starting negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut off Treaty in the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva are also needed to be addressed collectively in the
nearest future.
The development of nuclear energ_vmust exclude any risk of proliferation of
nuclear materials and technologies. Here, we should keep in mind 1hat the line
between military and peace fol purposes is very thin. That is why it can not be left
out our sight, but the measures must be indiscriminate, effici,mt and generally
agreed. \Vithin the IAEA the international community has developed such
instruments and we hope that it will continue to serve to the interests of all
countries.


The failure of the international community, first and foremost of Middle
Eastem countries, to convene a conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free from nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in 20 12 is
matter of deep concem for us. \Ve do believe that every effort should be applied
for this forum to take place in 2020 with participation of all states of the region and
we urge parties involved to contribute to realization of a decision reached during
the 1995 NPT RevCon. Hence, the establishmen1 of a Middle East zone should be
in the focus of the current Preparatory Committee.
It is strongly in the interests of the international community and of Iran for
the JCPOA to be upheld and fully implemented. It is our view that JCPOA remains
the best available mechanism to assure the international community of Iran's
commitment to conducting an entirely peaceful nuclear program. Therefore we
support the draft Joint statement prepared by Russia and China aimed at voicing
our support for the JCPOA and hope that this document will find broad support,
Kazakhstan welcomes the conclusion of the recent summit between the
President of the Republic of Korea and the Supreme Leader of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, held on April 27, 2018 at the border point of
Panmunjom. Kazakhstan wishes to express its support for the settlement process
on the Korean peninsula, which can only be achieved through dialogue and
negotiations. We are strongly convinced that political and diplomatic solutions are
the only effective tools for dealing with complex internat'onal issues. \Ve fully
support the two countries1 agreement to achieve a nuclear-free status on the
peninsula.
Mr. Chair,
Kazakhstan is one of the initiators of the Central Asian ~uclear-WeaponFree Zone. With that I would like to point out that ensuring a full value and
practicability of this nuclear-weapon-free zones is essential both from the point of
strengthening regional and global security as well as advancement of nonproliferation efforts. The voluntary commitment of states to establish a respective
zone should be encouraged and supported in every possible way.
The Central Asian States are strongly committed to institutionalize the
Semipalatinsk Treaty.
In conclusion let me express our hope that current review process will not be
exclusion in promoting our adherence to rational approaches and strengthening a
1nutual confidence to allow us to reach compromises on all issues related to
implementation of the Treaty, as well as providing a new impetus for a global nonproliferation regime.
I thank you Jl,lr. Chair.

