As of April 28, 2017
Statement
by the Delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2017 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 2 Specific Issue – Nonproliferation and other Provisions of the Treaty
Vienna, May 8-10, 2017
Mr. Chair,
Kazakhstan's position on strengthening the non-proliferation regime remains
firm, clear and unchanged. The significance of this issue is undeniable since nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are closely related and interdependent. It is our
conviction that all three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons should be respected and fully implemented.
Kazakhstan, as one of the active States Parties to the NPT, continues its
active efforts aimed at creating favorable conditions for inclusive and multilateral
dialogue on pressing challenges. Our country hosted various international fora
devoted to non-proliferation and nuclear threat reduction.
Mr. Chair,
Under the Action Plan of the 2010, NPT RevCon States Parties agreed on 23
items dealing with non-proliferation issues and, compared to other actions, their
fulfillment can be described as successful. However, the failure of NPT RevCon in
2015, as well as the latest global developments and challenges we face, once again
demonstrate that we need to look more closely at this issue.
In this respect, universalization of the NPT remains the highest priority in
preventing proliferation of nuclear threat as well as ensuring global peace and
security. It is a well-known fact that some states developing non-safeguarded
nuclear facilities still remain outside the NPT. We do hope that the current session
will generate new ideas and approaches towards the accomplishment of this
specific, but extremely vital, work.
An early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
starting negotiations on the Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty in the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva are also to be addressed collectively in the nearest future.
The development of nuclear energy must exclude any risk of proliferation of
weapons-grade nuclear materials and technologies. Here, we should keep in mind
that the line between military and peaceful purposes is very thin. That is why it
cannot be left out of our sight. These measures must be indiscriminate, efficient and
generally agreed upon. Within the IAEA, the international community has
developed such instruments and we hope that it will continue to serve the interests
of all countries.

2

The failure of the international community, first and foremost of the
countries in the Middle East, to convene a conference in 2012 on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free from nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction is a matter of deep concern for us. We do believe that this forum will
take place in 2020 with the participation of all states of the region. We urge parties
involved to contribute to the realization of a decision reached during the 1995 NPT
RevCon. Hence, the establishment of a Middle East zone should be the focus of
the current Preparatory Committee.
Mr. Chair,
Kazakhstan is one of the initiators of the Central Asian Nuclear-WeaponFree Zone. With that in mind, I would like to point out that ensuring full value and
practicability of this nuclear-weapon-free zones is essential both from the point of
strengthening regional and global security, as well as advancement of nonproliferation efforts. The voluntary commitment of states to establish a respective
zone should be encouraged and supported in every possible way.
The Central Asian States are strongly committed to institutionalizing the
Semipalatinsk Treaty. We look forward to the ratification by the US of the
Protocol on negative security assurances for States participating in our zone.
In conclusion let me express our hope that the current review process will
take into account our adherence to rational approach and the strengthening of
mutual confidence to allow us to reach compromise on all issues related to the
implementation of the Treaty, as well as providing a new impetus for a global nonproliferation regime.
I thank you Mr. Chair.

