STATEMENT BY H.E. DATUK HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AT THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 2 (SPECIFIC ISSUES)
OF THE THIRD SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
NEW YORK, 1 MAY 2014

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia associates itself with the statement made by Indonesia on behalf of the NonAligned Movement States Parties to the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,

2.

Malaysia is a long standing supporter of Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (NWFZ).

Malaysia believes that NWFZs strengthen peace and security as they promote greater
transparency and dialogue among States regionally, eventually leading to the creation of
an environment conducive to arms control and obliquely reduce the risk of regional
conflicts.

3.

At the regional level, Malaysia is committed to preserve Southeast Asia as a

nuclear-weapon-free zone. In this regard, Malaysia urges the nuclear-weapons states to
become parties to the protocol of the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone
(SEANWFZ) at the earliest opportunity. Accession to the protocol by the Nuclear Weapons
States would effectively accord negative security assurance to the regional States Parties
and

createconduciveconditions

for

durable

promoteconfidence building in the region.

1

peace

and

security,

as

well

as

Mr. Chairman,
4.

Malaysia believes that the establishment of new zones represent a positive step

towards attaining the objectiveof global nuclear disarmament. In this regard, Malaysia
welcomes the decision of the 2010 Review Conference on "practical steps" to implement
the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. Malaysia wishes to reaffirm the need for the
prompt establishment of such a zone in the Middle East, in accordance with the Security
Council Resolution 487 of 1981 and paragraph 14 of the Security Council Resolution 687
of 1991 and the relevant General Assembly resolutions.

5.

In the same context, Malaysia regrets the failure to convene the Middle East

Conference on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free-zonein 2012. This Conference
needs to provide the necessary impetus for concrete action in realising the outcome of the
1995 Middle East Resolution, which has been stagnant for far too long. We believe that
the Conference will provide the opportunity for all states to find common ground and begin
discussions on achieving a nuclear-weapon-free-zone in the Middle East.
6.

My delegation welcomes the tireless efforts of the facilitator, Ambassador Jaako

Laajava, in consulting with the States in the region in order to ensure the convening of the
Conference. We note in particular the series of consultations held in Glion in recent
months, which are important but long overdue steps in trying to bring all the concerned
States to the table. However, these efforts will only be in vain if the Conference is again
postponed unilaterally. If all States are indeed committed to the establishment of a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, we
must all approach the Conference without prejudice towards the different security
concerns of others.

7.

The Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dato’ Sri Mohd. Najib Tun Abdul

Razak, had stated last year that this meeting of minds would be the right step towards
continued peace and stability in the troubled region.My delegation therefore urges the
Secretary-General as well as the three cosponsors of the 1995 Resolution, namely the
United States, the United Kingdom, and the Russian Federation, to take all necessary
measures to fully implement the resolution and to convene the Conference at the earliest
possible opportunity, with the active participation of all states in the region.

2

Mr. Chairman,

8.

In light of the lack of progress in convening the Conference, NPT State Parties

should also consider the establishment of a subsidiary body to Main Committee II of the
2015 Review Conference, to review the implementation of the 1995 Resolution. This is in
line with the decision reached at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, which
provided for the establishment of such subsidiary bodies within the respective Main
Committees for specific issues relevant to the Treaty. Malaysia is in favour of pragmatic
approaches to achieve the long term goal of total elimination of nuclear weapons, and we
stand ready to work with all parties in this regard.

9.

Malaysia also believes that our discussions should focus on ways to universalise

the NPT. In this regard, we wish to reiterate the call for states remaining outside the NPT
regime to accede to the treaty as non-nuclear weapons state. In particular, states parties
should urge Israel, being the only non-signatory to the NPT in the Middle East, to
immediately accede to the treaty and to place all its nuclear materials and facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards. Israel’s accession to the NPT would certainly enhance
regional peace and security.

10.

Let me conclude by underlining Malaysia’s hope that the establishment of a zone

free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East will enhance global and regional
peace, and strengthen non-proliferation efforts among countries in the region which are
parties to or outside recognised international WMD regimes.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

3

