Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY …………
……
DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 2
OF THE FIRST SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
VIENNA, 8 MAY 2017
Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia associates itself with the statement of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties
to the NPT on Cluster II issues, as delivered earlier by Indonesia.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
Malaysia underscores the role of the IAEA as the sole competent authority
responsible for establishing and promulgating effective safeguards and verification
mechanisms for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. States Parties should be transparent
when complying with the IAEA safeguards and verification in line with provisions of the
Treaty. Malaysia believes that this transparency will build mutual trust and confidence
amongst states. We also believe that these information and access provided to the IAEA
by States Parties should be held in the highest confidence by the Agency.
3.
An example of the successful implementation of safeguards and verifications would
be the on-going implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action between Iran
and the P5+1 on Iran’s nuclear programme. This example not only reaffirms the
importance of the IAEA’s safeguards as a fundamental component to nuclear nonproliferation and its indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT, but also
enhances international confidence by providing assurance that States are complying with
their safeguard obligations and help to create a conducive environment for nuclear
cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
4.
Terrorism and nuclear terrorism has become a global concern. While nuclear
terrorism has yet to happen, it may become a reality if proper safeguards and nonproliferation measures are not in place. Towards this end, Malaysia calls on States to
effectively prevent and respond to incidents of illicit nuclear trafficking. We encourage
States Parties to exchange information and expertise through bilateral and multilateral
mechanisms in areas such as nuclear detection, law enforcement, forensics, and the
development of new technologies.
5.
Malaysia also supports the implementation of robust practices on nuclear security,
including export control laws, which should not infringe upon the rights of States to

develop and utilize nuclear energy and technology for peaceful purposes. While we are of
the view that continuous national efforts are required to ensure effective nuclear security,
this should also be supported and facilitated by international cooperation mechanisms.
6.
In light of the above, Malaysia encourages States to develop a security culture with
regard to safeguarding nuclear security information. This, in our delegation’s view, would
reaffirm the importance of preventing non-state actors from obtaining information,
technology or expertise required to possess or use nuclear resources for malicious
purposes, or to disrupt information systems at nuclear facilities – all very real challenges
we face today.
Mr. Chairman,
7.
In relation to the topic of nuclear weapons free zones (NWFZ), Malaysia continues
to believe that such zones contribute significantly to global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation objectives. NWFZs will promote greater transparency and dialogue among
States regionally, eventually leading to the creation of an environment conducive to arms
control and reduce the risk of regional conflicts. In this regard, Malaysia calls on the
Nuclear-Weapon-States to accede to the Protocol to the Treaty on Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANFWZ).
8.
Additionally, Malaysia welcomes all efforts aimed at establishing nuclear weapon
free zones in all regions based on agreements freely arrived at between the States of the
region concerned. In this regard, Malaysia calls upon States to conclude agreements with
a view to establishing new nuclear weapon free zones in regions where they do not exist,
especially in regions such as South Asia, Northeast Asia, Central Europe and the Middle
East through the implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. Such
measures will ban the use, development and deployment of nuclear weapons in these
regions, paving the way for general and complete disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction in the world.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

