Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. AMBASSADOR HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK
AT THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 2 OF THE
SECOND SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia associates itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the NonAligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
As a signatory to the NPT and a Member State of the IAEA, Malaysia reaffirms its
commitment to non-proliferation as well as to implementation of its obligations under the
NPT Safeguards Agreement. Malaysia has always believed in the central role of the IAEA
as the sole competent authority responsible for establishing and promulgating effective
safeguards and verification mechanisms for peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this
regard, we continue to urge State Parties to cooperate with the Agency, in abiding by their
safeguards obligations under the Treaty.
3.
NPT State Parties should exercise full transparency in their nuclear programmes,
by subjecting them to the IAEA's full scope safeguards and verifications, in line with the
provisions of the Treaty. Malaysia believes that through transparency, mutual trust and
confidence will be enhanced amongst states. Hence, their fundamental and inalienable
right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected. This includes States' full
access to nuclear knowledge, through technology transfer, education and training.
4.
While Malaysia believes that the Additional Protocol could provide the IAEA an
additional tool for enhanced verification, the information and access provided to the IAEA
by State Parties should be held in the highest confidence by the Agency. In this regard ,
my delegation recalls that the IAEA General Conference, through its resolutions
GC(54)/RES/11 and more recently GC(56)RES/13, reaffirmed the need to strengthen the
protection of classified and confidential information.
5.
Malaysia wishes to reiterate its commitment towards its NPT Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement obligations. In addition to receiving regular inspections at the
country's only research reactor facility namely the TRIGA MARK II PUSPATI, Malaysia
continues to provide access to non-Material Balance Areas (MBA) as requested by the
IAEA. In 2012, Malaysia submitted voluntary declarations as would be required under
Article 2 of the Additional Protocol.

6.
Malaysia also engages in non-proliferation capacity building activities at the
regional level, having participated actively in several regional initiatives aimed at
enhancing the non-proliferation framework of understanding within the ASEAN and AsiaPacific regions and enhancing national competence in safeguards and verification
measures. In this regard, we would also like to acknowledge and express our gratitude for
the assistance provided by other states parties and regional entities towards building our
national competence in these areas.
7.
Malaysia considers the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a
primary disarmament instrument and we continue to join the CTBTO in calling upon the
remaining States, especially those on the Annex 2, to immediately sign and ratify the
CTBT. Malaysia welcomes the recent ratification by Brunei Darussalam and Chad and
looks forward to the early entry into force of the Treaty and its universality.
8.
Malaysia has drafted a new comprehensive atomic energy bill which will be enacted
as a new law. This new law which encompasses nuclear safety, security and safeguards
which we believe are the building blocks of a nuclear non-proliferation regime shall be a
further demonstration of our full commitment to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
Nuclear security is essential to the NPT agenda. A global nuclear security culture
must be established in order to assure a safe world. Cooperation at bilateral, regional and
multilateral levels for the promotion nuclear security through technology and human
resource development, as well as through education and training is therefore necessary.
Cooperation shall also include sharing of information and expertise, subject to respective
national laws and procedures, through bilateral and multilateral mechanisms in relevant
areas such as nuclear detection, border control, forensics , law enforcement and the
development of new technologies to prevent illicit trafficking of nuclear materials.
10.
In this regard, Malaysia is pleased to announce that we have recently received
recognition from the IAEA as a Nuclear Security Support Centre (NSSC) with a reg ional
role. Malaysia's Integrated Nuclear Security Support Plan (INSSP) has also been
acknowledged as a model for the successful implementation of nuclear security measures
through the effective coordination of the roles of key players at the national level. We have
successfully organized , with the assistance of the IAEA, several regional training courses
and also launched bilateral cooperation with some member states in the region.
Mr. Chairman,
11 .
While Malaysia has established the 2010 Strategic Trade Act (Act 708) to
implement an export control regime, Malaysia would like to reiterate that the
implementation of strong nuclear security practices including export control must not
infringe upon the rights of States to develop and utilize nuclear energy and technology for
peaceful purposes. We believe that while nuclear security measures may be taken by
States on a voluntary basis, these should be further encouraged and supported as these
national efforts, facilitated by international cooperation, are crucial for global nuclear
security.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

