Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement of the NAM States Parties to the NPT. In addition, my delegation wishes to make the following points.
Malaysia recognizes the IAEA's invaluable contribution in establishing and promulgating effective safeguards and verification mechanisms for peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We call upon all Member States to abide by these safeguards. As a signatory to the NPT and a Member State of the IAEA, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to non-proliferation. We also reaffirm the centrality of the IAEA in nuclear safeguards and verifications.
All States must adhere to the cardinal principles underlying the activities related to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In ensuring that the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy is not abused, States must exercise full transparency in nuclear programmes, subject those programmes to the full scope of the IAEA's safeguards and verification, including the Additional Protocol, and adhere to the provisions of the NPT. Only then, the trust and confidence of the international community over the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes, could be gained.
The IAEA should be provided with necessary resources and the space to discharge its mandated activities in an effective and professional manner. We support the IAEA's project on Enhancing Capabilities of the Safeguards Analytical Sendees (ECAS). We also support the establishment of new certified laboratories to the NWAL system in order to address the delays in Environmental Sample Processing. We see a need for the IAEA to enhance rules and modalities on preserving the confidentiality of safeguards related information.
Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia washes to reiterate its commitment to fully implement its obligations under the NPT Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA. We welcome safeguards inspection at the country's sole research reactor facility - the TRIGA Mark II PUSPATI. As an undertaking to ensure transparency, we continue to provide access to the non-Material Balance Areas (MBA) for safeguards inspection. We have already approved the issuance of one year multiple entry visas to the designated safeguards inspectors.
Permanent Mission of Malaysia to the United Nations 313 E 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017 T: 212 986 6310 F: 212 490 8576
Nuclear safety is a paramount element of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. And we have taken note of the IAEA's efforts to support nuclear safety worldwide. While there is an increase in the level of nuclear safety performance worldwide, we nevertheless must remain vigilant and continue to improve nuclear safety. Any nuclear or radiological incident could put at risk lives and harm the environment. Due to the trans-boundary nature of potential hazards, Malaysia calls for greater international cooperation in the handling of nuclear and radiological material.We consider the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a primary disarmament instrument. We join the CTBTO in calling upon the remaining Member States, especially of the Annex 2 States, to immediately sign the CTBT. We look forward to the early entry into force of the Treaty. Malaysia ratified the CTBT on 17 January 2008.
We host a Radionuclide Particle Monitoring Station, RN42, in collaboration with the CTBTO. The Station meets the requirements and specifications of the International Monitoring System (IMS). Its operational performance was certified on 14 July 2009. In addition, the Malaysian National Data Centre (MY_NDC) has been equipped with the required software and is ready to receive data from the International Data Centre (IDC) in Vienna. I am pleased to announce that Malaysia is in the process of establishing an environmental sample analytical laboratory within the next few years. We hope that this facility will one day be accredited by the IAEA to be part of the NVVAL.
Mr. Chairman,
We will continue to do our part to fulfill our obligations under the Treaty and the IAEA safeguards and verification mechanisms.
Thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



