MISION PERMANENTE DE MEXICO

STATEMENT OF THE MEXICAN DELEGATION, DURING THE MAIN COMMITTEE 11
OF THE IX REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
New York, May 4th 2015

Mr. President,
Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, one of the central goals of the NPT, is undoubtedly
the pillar of the Treaty on which more progress has been registered. Therefore, Mexico
recalls the importance of achieving a balance between the agendas of disarmament and
non-proliferation, two processes that are mutually reinforcing.
Mexico has more than fulfilled all its obligations on non-proliferation in accordance with the
NPT, in particular, Article Ill on the establishment of comprehensive safeguards and the
commitment not to provide nuclear material and related technologies to states that do not
have safeguards agreements in force with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In this regard, Mexico recognizes the important work of the IAEA in verification through the
application of safeguards (Additional Protocols and comprehensive agreements), thus
strengthening the non-proliferation regime.
Mexico reiterates the importance for all States Parties, including all Nuclear Weapons
States (NWS), to comply with its international obligations in cooperation with the IAEA and
of implementing its resolutions as well as to comply with the United Nations Security
Council resolutions, in order to contribute to peace and international security.

Mr. President:
Mexico further contributes to the global efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation, through the
implementation of effective national controls on transfers of nuclear material, dual-use
goods and related technology, in order to avoid that these goods could contribute directly
or indirectly to the development or manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices.
Mexico's contribution in this regard, even exceeds its obligations under international law.
With the aim of contributing to international security, my country participates in the Nuclear
Suppliers Group as an option to implement its international responsibilities.
Mr. President:
Mexico as the main promoter of the first Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in a densely
populated area supports the creation of new NWFZ as an effective measure for
disarmament. Their establishment in any region of the world, should be agreed and must
be the result of the free choice of the parties involved. In that sense, Mexico is respectful

of the sovereign decisions of States wishing to conclude treaties for establishing new
denuclearized zones.
Mexico considers that while militarily denuclearized zones are not an end in themselves,
they represent an intermediate step of great importance for making progress towards the
conclusion of general and complete disarmament under effective international control.
In this regard, it must be recognize the decision of the 116 countries that are part of the 5
treaties establishing NWFZ in Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa, South Pacific,
Southeast Asia and Central Asia, and Mongolia, to prohibit nuclear weapons in their
regions and to set the basis for a world free of nuclear weapons. It is important to highlight
that these 116 countries constitute three quarters of the international community.
Mexico calls upon all NWS to withdraw their reservations or interpretative declarations to
the treaties that establish NWFZ and its Protocols, particularly the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
which will allow these areas to be really free from the threat of nuclear weapons.
Mexico commends the efforts of Indonesia to organize the Third Conference of the Parties
to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, held on 24 April in United Nations
Headquarters. The general debate that took place in the framework of the Conference
reaffirmed the contribution of these areas to international peace and security and nonproliferation regime. However, Mexico regrets that it was not possible to adopt yet the
outcome document of this Conference as schedule.

Mr. President:
Mexico also regrets the postponement of the Conference for the establishment of a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, which
should be held in 2012. Therefore, we call upon for the convening of this Conference as
soon as possible in order to reinforce the credibility of the NPT. The establishment of such
a zone was an essential part of the commitments for the indefinite extension of the NPT in
1995.

Mr. President:
Mexico strongly condemns nuclear testing by any actor and under any circumstances. In
this regard, Mexico is an active promoter of the entry into force of the CTBT, as part of the
13 practical steps. In this regard, my country calls upon Annex II countries, whose
ratification is essential for the entry into force of this Treaty to do so as soon as possible.
We also encourage them not conduct nuclear tests and refrain from acts that would go
against the object and purpose of the Treaty.
Mexico recognizes the effectiveness of the Verification and Monitoring System established
by the CTBT, which makes the detection of nuclear explosive tests related activities
possible. It also recognizes firmly and steadily, the need to conclude a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices,
considering it as a step towards the goal of complete elimination of nuclear weapons and
towards the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime.

Mr. President:

Mexico maintains that the negotiation of fissile material treaty for the fabrication of nuclear
weapons and other explosive nuclear devices should be seen as part of a broad and
comprehensive process of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and considers it
necessary that such instrument provides elements such as the regulation of existing fissile
material, a verification mechanism and confidence building measures. While there are
several draft texts for the instrument, Mexico considers that these should be considered as
a basis for negotiation, without limiting the discussion and the analysis of other proposals,
thus avoiding a discriminatory scheme.
Mexico also hopes that such treaty is negotiated in the most inclusive format possible,
since disarmament and non-proliferation are relevant matters for humanity and not only for
a few.
Thank you very much.

