Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first of all to congratulate you on the assumption of the Chairmanship of this important committee of the Conference and pledge my delegation's foil support of your work. Mongolia associates itself with the statement of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I would like to briefly comment on three issues allocated to this Committee to which we attach great importance.
Safeguards
It is widely accepted that through its verification activities the IAEA plays an important role in ensuring the implementation of the Treaty and thus also in creating the environment conducive to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. This role should not only be reaffirmed by the Conference, but also by the support of concrete measures that are needed to be taken to strengthen the Agency in every way, including further empowering it to effectively and independently carry out its activities, by providing more resources and the needed technology.
Though the Director General of the Agency has reported that the adherence to IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreements (CSAs) and Additional Protocols (APs) has been increasing, he also pointed out that more needed to be done, since still 20 NPT parties have not brought the CSAs into force, while only 98 states so far have ratified the APs. As it has been pointed out, APs are of vital importance for the Agency to be able to provide credible assurance not only that declared nuclear material is not being diverted from peaceful uses, but also that there are no undeclared nuclear material and activities in a given State. Therefore the Conference needs to call upon states to strengthen the Agency and urge those states that have yet not done so to ratify the CSAs and the APs as soon as possible.
Nuclear-weapon-free zone
Nuclear threat affects every people, big or small alike. Hence every country, jointly or individually, should make its contribution to promoting the goals of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. Nuclear-weapon-free zones make an important practical contribution to promoting a nuclear-weapon-free world. Since the last Review Conference, the Pelindaba treaty and the Central Asian NWFZ treaty have entered into force and thus expanded considerably the nuclear-weapon free area of the globe. In both cases Mongolia was among the first to welcome their entry into force.. Likewise, we welcomed the successful outcome of the Second Conference of NWFZs and Mongolia held on 30 April here at UN Headquarters, which took many important decisions that would strengthen cooperation within and among NWFZs as well provide positive input to the successful outcome of this Conference. In the spirit of solidarity with other NWFZs, we welcomed the recent decision by the US administration to submit protocols to the Rarotonga and Pelindaba NWFZ treaties for ratification by the U.S. Senate.
Mr. Chairman, ensuring security by acquiring nuclear weapons or by hosting such weapons on its territory are not farsighted policies. Mongolia is a sparsely populated vast land of 1.5 mln sq. kms that is situated in the heart of Asia. It can be a solid building block for the Eurasian security
architecture, or a un-defined grey area that could be used in great power politics or power projection. Mongolia chose to be the former. Hence in 1992 when the Russian troops were being withdrawn from its territory, my country declared its territory a single-State nuclear-weapon-free zone and has since been working to have that status internationally recognized and guaranteed. Today it enjoys wide international support. However, to make the status credible we still need to properly institutionalize it, i.e. clearly define that status together with our two immediate neighbors (that happen to be two of the P5) and acquire a pledge from the P5 to respect that status. If the P5 provide or are ready to provide security assurances to entire regions and even whole continents, it should not be very difficult to pledge to respect Mongolia's nuclear-weapon- free status. In Mongolia we have a saying that the greatness of a people is measured primarily not by its wealth but by how it treats the small and vulnerable. It is to be hoped that the nuclear weapon states would, after over a decade of 'reflection' about Mongolia's status, agree to provide such assurances to Mongolia.
Therefore we express the hope that the final document of this Conference would not simply "recognize and affirm" Mongolia's status but rather express support for Mongolia's policy to institutionalize its nuclear-weapon-free status as well as the conviction that it would be accomplished in the near future. Full information about Mongolia's policy, what has been achieved and what still needs to be done can be found in the Memorandum of the Government of Mongolia that has been issued as document NPT/CONF.2010/12. Paras. 13-17 of the Memorandum give insight on the efforts to institutionalize the status. My delegation will provide a draft review language to you, Mr. Chairman during the course of the day.
Middle-East NWFZ
One of the main objectives of this Conference should be concrete and practical recommendations concerning implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted 15 years ago by the 1995 Review and-Extension Conference. It was part of the package that enabled the Conference to indefinitely extend the Treaty. Since many have spoken in the plenary of the Conference and in this Committee, I shall not dwell on it. My delegation's position on this issue has been reflected in the NAM working paper and the draft Elements for a Plan of Action for the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. We express the hope that the Conference would be able to make progress on this important issue.
Thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



