Statement by Amb. J. Enkhsaikhan of Mongolia
on cluster 2 issues relating to NWFZs
Vienna, VIC
Mr. Chairman,
As a non-nuclear-weapon state, Mongolia attaches great importance to the issues related
to establishing and strengthening of nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs). In this regard it
supports the content of working paper 28 submitted by members of the group of non-aligned
states parties to the NPT. Mongolia believes that establishment of NWFZs contributes to the
goals of non-proliferation and total elimination of nuclear weapons. On the other hand the
nuclear-weapon states. according to the NPT, are duty bound to eliminate their arsenals. Only
implemented together will the NPT's objective and hence the noble goal of a nuclear-weaponfree wil I be achieved.
Two years that have passed since 201 0 successful NPT review conference have witnessed
encouraging steps to implement the agreement related to NWFZs. Some of the previous speakers
have already made reference to these actions. In this connection my delegation would like to
welcome the two monitoring reports undertaken after the 2010 conference and circulated among
delegations by the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies and Reaching Critical Will.
These reports show what steps have been taken and what steps are still needed to be taken by the
nuclear-weapon states and states parties or signatories to NWFZ treaties to implement the 2010
agreements.
Mongolia welcomes the entry into force of the Semipalatinsk and Pelindaba treaties and
establishment of AFCONE and of the review process of the Pelindaba treaty. It also welcomes
Russia's ratification of the protocol to that treaty. Significant progress has been recorded to
bringing closer together the parties to the Bangkok treaty and the nuclear weapon states that
might allow the latter to sign the protocols. U.S. leadership in this needs to be mentioned.
Likewise, we hope that the talks regarding possible endorsement by the P3 of the Semipalatinsk
treaty and its protocol would allow signing of the protocol. We are hopeful that the positive
atmosphere regarding the existing NWFZs will allow further progress, especially in withdrawing
reservations and interpretative declarations made when signing the protocols.
Establishment of new NWFZs is another issue that prepcom is to address. The issue of
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction will
be considered separately tomorrow after hearing an initial report on preparations to the
conference by its facilitator - Mr. Jaakko Laajava. Therefore my delegation chooses not to
comment on this issue at this meeting but would only welcome Finland's decision to host the
conference and express its full support for a successful conference. My delegation believes that
the proceedings of the IAEA forum on this issue, held in Vienna last November, would be useful
for substantive and procedural preparations.

I would like to drawn your attention to the first preparatory meeting for the 2015 Third
Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia (NWFZM), which was held last

Friday here in Vienna. and which my country had the honor to chair. The meeting was attended
by representatives of over 50 countries. It addressed various issues connected with implementing
the provisions of NWFZ treaties and protocols to them. It heard reports by NWFZs and some
member states on implementation of the decisions of the Second conference and exchanged
views on early preparations for the third conference. Questions of further cooperation within and
among NWFZs were discussed. Also was discussed how this growing group of like-minded and
dedicated countries can contribute to this and subsequent two preparatory committee meetings
and to the successful outcome of the 2015 NPT review conference. Special importance was
attached to a successful convening of the conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. The preparatory meeting
welcomed Indonesia's decision to host the third conference. The meeting also heard statements
by observers from nuclear-weapon states which underlined the importance that they attach to the
issues pertaining to N WFZs.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, about Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status. Since I have dealt
on this issue in the general debate, I see no reason to do so now. I would just like to inform you
that Mongolia is working to institutionalize its unique status, which enjoys the support of all the
non-nuclear-weapon states parties to the NPT. At present Mongolia is re-engaged with the P5 on
this issue. It will be holding a meeting with the P5 on the margins of this preparatory meeting to
address the issues of content and format of security assurances that we are seeking. If need be,
my delegation will submit a working paper on this issue.
Thank you.

