Kingdom of Morocco
201 5 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Main Committee II I General Debate
Statement delivered by Mr. Bouchaib Eloumni
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Mission of the Kingdom
of Morocco to the United Nations in New York
05 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,

Let me first of all congratulate you for your election as Chair of the Main
Committee I and assure you of our delegation support and full cooperation.
Morocco associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Nonaligned Movement and the League of Arab States, while reaffirming the views
expressed by the delegation of Morocco during the General debate of the
Conference.
Mr. Chairman,

Before I tum to what we consider this Conference should agree on, I would like to
share with you some information on some relevant measures taken recently by the
Kingdom of Morocco in the framework of its efforts aimed at strengthening its
legal arsenal in areas related to nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation. I

1- On 18 September 2014 the Kingdom of Morocco promulgated Act 142-12 on
nuclear and radiological safety and security and on the establishment of the agency
entrusted with its oversight. The aim is to harmonize the national legal arsenal with
the relevant provisions of the international conventions on the subject. This Law
provides for the establishment of a National Regulatory Authority whose mandate
is to ensure close monitoring of nuclear material and radioactive sources; to
maintain an inventory of such material and to apply safety and security measures.
1/3

The implementing Decree which establishes this Agency is in the process of being
finalized and is expected to be adopted in 2015.
2- The ratification of the 2005 amendment of the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material is at its final stage.
3- Morocco enacted early this year a decree on safety and management of
hazardous wastes, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.

Mr. Chairman,
The Conference should arrive at an outcome that reflects the following:
1.

The Conference should recall that it is crucial that all non-proliferation
provisions are strictly and universally implemented. States should fulfill
obligations deriving from instruments they adhered to in a sovereign manner.

2.

The Conference should acknowledge that the IAEA safeguards regime, whose
principal component remains the NPT safeguards agreements, continues to
prove effective despite difficulties and challenges.

3.

The Conference should underlines that the authority of the IAEA in the field
of safeguards must be respected. Furthermore the Agency should be provided
with all necessary means to discharge its mandate with respect to safeguards.

4.

The Conference should reiterate its support for strengthening the IAEA
safeguards regime, including through the promotion of the Additional
Protocol to the safeguards agreements.

5.

The Conference should reaffirm that all previously agreed measures,
including in 2010, remain valid and relevant and needs to be fully
implemented.

6.

In the same vein, efforts aimed at the universality of the IAEA comprehensive
safeguards agreements should be enhanced in order to ensure the
effectiveness of the non-proliferation regime.

7.

The Conference should underline that non-proliferation obligations are not
meant to be barriers to the enjoyment of the right to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, while emphasizing that the delicate balance between rights and
obligations should be preserved.

8.

The Conference should welcome the Framework agreement between the P5+ 1
and the Islamic Republic of Iran and reaffirm the importance of diplomacy
and dialogue in resolving issues related to nuclear non-proliferation.
Furthermore, the Conference should encourage all parties to continue
2/3

engaging in good fate in order to arrive at a final agreement as soon as
possible.
9.

The Conference should acknowledge that voluntary coalitions and
international initiatives, such as the Nuclear Security Summits, play an
important role in supporting the non-proliferation regime through
strengthened international awareness and sharing of experiences and best
practices, in full respect of the authority of the IAEA.

Mr. President,

The effectiveness of the NPT requires among others ensuring its universality. All
remaining States should join the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states.
Morocco regrets that, despite all efforts, the 2012 conference for making the
Middle-East a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction has not been convened.
The international community missed an opportunity to launch a process that could
contribute to building confidence between the countries of the region and would
enhance peace and security in the region and beyond.
All efforts should be made to convene such a conference in order to achieve the
objectives of 1995 resolution on the Middle East. It should be recalled that the
indefinite extension of the Treaty was agreed upon in 1995 on the basis also of that
resolution. It is necessary to undertake effective and practical measures to free the
Middle East from all weapons of mass destruction.
The review Conference is invited to take bold measures in order to preserve the
credibility of the Treaty and the regimes it established.
The delegation of Morocco will engage positively and constructively on this issue.
Thank you

3/3

