1.	The Netherlands fully endorses the intervention made by the Presidency of the European Union. From a national perspective, we would like to add the following observations concerning non-proliferation.
2.	Nuclear terrorism is one of the biggest threats to international security. There is a strong need for the international community to be continuously aware of new, emergent security and proliferation risks.
3.	For the Netherlands, the system of treaties, agreements and standards continues to form the heart of the government's policy on non-proliferation.
4.	Within the existing international legal framework, the Netherlands is willing to add new instruments to the existing ones, use new techniques and assist in the development of new instruments that can be used in specific instances to counter new proliferation risks. The Proliferation Security Initiative, UN Security Council Resolution 1540, and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism are examples of new instruments that strengthen the global non-proliferation regime, all of which are pro-actively supported by the Netherlands.
5.	The Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism has made major progress since it was launched in July 2006. Four meetings in Rabat, Ankara, Astana and Madrid, as well as different activities held in GI Partner Nations in order to develop the Global Initiative Principles, have created a solid basis that has led to the enlargement and strengthening of our partnership.
6.	In close cooperation with the co-chairs, the United States and the Russian Federation, the Netherlands will host the Fifth 2009 plenary of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in June 2009. Later this year, we will also organise an international Global Initiative Exercise on the prevention of nuclear terrorism. In both events the IAEA will be closely involved.
7. By building multilateral cooperation on existing international frameworks, we can maximise efficiency and consequently maximise our effectiveness to combat nuclear terrorism. These international frameworks are notably the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its 2005 Amendment, and United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1373 and 1540. Legitimacy, promoting international cooperation, and utilising a hands-on approach are the keywords for the plenary in The Hague.