Statement by H.E. Ambassador Paul van den IJssel, Kingdom of the
Netherlands

2nd session NPT prepcorn, Cluster 2
Mr Chairman,

I n addition to the points made in our statement in the General debate and
while aligning ourselves fully to the statement made by the EU and the
papers by NPDI and the Vienna Group of 10, Iwould like to make the
following remarks on Cluster 2 issues.

)

Let me stress again that the Netherlands considers the proliferation of
nuclear weapons as one of the gravest threats to international peace and
stability. I am thinking in particular of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and Iran, but let's not forget outstanding issues concerning Syria. I
have dwelt on this topic in our earlier statement.
Let me also underline the importance we attach to verification and
safeguards. For the ether lands the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement,
supplemented by the Additional Protocol represents the international
standard for verification. Verification by this standard provides trust and the
confidence that nuclear materials are exclusively used for peaceful means.
This is conducive to an environment in which international cooperation, on
all nuclear issues, including nuclear disarmament, can flourish. The
Netherlands applies the most stringent safeguards measures in its nuclear
installations and we call upon all States that have not concluded an
Additional Protocol yet, to do so without delay. We see the continuous
development of an ever more effective verification mechanism as an
important task in the field of nonproliferation. We therefore must not shy
away from improvements and new technical capabilities that can help us in
this regard. The Netherlands welcomes these new developments, and is in
favor of a verification concept that incorporates this, such as the State-level
concept.
The Netherlands is actively promoting the universalization of the AP in
concrete ways. Not only by means of the ongoing extra-budgetary grant to
the lAEA in order to assist the Agency in its efforts in this regard, but we
also stand ready to assist to those Member States interested, to share our

I

experiences and best practices. This also applies to providing practical or
legal assistance.
The Netherlands further attaches great importance to the universal
adherence to other key non-proliferation instruments. Very much in the
same vein as our commitment to the AP, The Netherlands actively advocates
universal adherence to the amended Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material (CPPNM), offering assistance to interested countries and
also granted the IAEA extra-budgetary means for its work on this
Convention.
Mr Chairman
On nuclear security. Let me repeat that The Netherlands is honored to host
the next NSS summit in 2014 i n the NSS context, we are working on several
deliverables. Among them, reduction of use and better security of HEU, the
entry into force of the CPPNM (for which we still need 33 ratifications), an
increased use of the IPPAS advisory missions of IAEA, better security of
radioactive sources, better cooperation between government and industry in
order to promote a security culture and better implementation. And last but
not least, we are exploring possibilities to introduce elements of mutual
confidence by countries. This can be done by effective implementation of the
existing legally binding and voluntary measures to enhance nuclear security,
as well as possible new elements such as voluntary peer reviews.
The NL will host 3 major side events as well. One is table top exercise, called
@tomic, in February 2014 on decision making on nuclear security. The
second one is a Nuclear Industry Summit and the third one a nuclear
knowledge summit.
Returning to the 2010 Action Plan, we can report that we are implementing
Action 61 by halting the use of HEU-targets in the production of medical
isotopes. The use of HEU fuel had already been stopped some time ago, and
a t the last Nuclear Security Summit we pledged to stop using HEU for
targets in 2015.
Preventing nuclear terrorism by continuously improving the security of
nuclear materials is a matter that deserves global attention. We therefore
warmly welcome the invitation by the IAEA to the Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Security in July 2013 and we encourage all States to support this
important conference. The IAEA has a central and essential role t o play with
regard to nuclear security and we are fully supportive of that. I n this context
Iwould like to draw the attention of delegates to the joint working paper of
Spain, Morocco and The Netherlands "ENHANCING INTERNATIONAL
PARTNERSHIP TO PREVENT NUCLEAR TERRORISM: A NEW DIMENSION OF

<

NON PROLIFERATION" t h a t was introduced b y the Ambassador o f Spain in
our session last Friday.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

