Mr. Chairman
The NPT confers on States party a set of interrelated and mutually reinforcing rights and obligations.
Among the elements of the Treaty that Main Committee II is reviewing are the provisions relating to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and safeguards. I wish to outline several key concerns of New Zealand in this area, in brief, recognizing the time constraints we are under.
The IAEA is charged with the responsibility of verifying that states do not divert nuclear energy to nuclear weapons programmes. New Zealand fully supports the statutory role of the IAEA Board and the Director General in relation to safeguards compliance.
In the early 1990s, after Iraq was discovered to have had a secret nuclear weapons programme, a Model Additional Protocol to the comprehensive safeguards agreement was developed in order to give the Agency increased scope in its verification activities, greatly enhancing its ability to perform its verification function. Subsequently it has been demonstrated that an Additional Protocol is critical for the Agency to be able to fulfill its statutory responsibility regarding assurances on the absence of undeclared material and activities.
The world is a very different place today from 1970, when the NPT came into force. Today many countries are in possession of advanced nuclear knowledge and technology. It is essential that the IAEA be given the tools it needs to do its job. The Additional Protocol is one such tool.
It is New Zealand's view that all States party to the Treaty should conclude both a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and an Additional Protocol with the Agency without delay. In our view IAEA's safeguards system includes both a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and an Additional Protocol. We consider a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, and an Additional Protocol, have become the new verification standard. We call upon the Conference to recognize this.
Mr. Chairman
An effective export control system is integral to States party being in a position to fulfill their obligations under Article III. The importance of export controls in preventing proliferation was recognized in UN Security Council resolution 1540 a year ago. Unless a state has effective export controls, it is unable to meet its Treaty obligation not to transfer to a non-nuclear weapons state nuclear material, equipment or technology unless they are subject to safeguards. New Zealand considers that the new verification standard, the Additional Protocol, should be confirmed by States party as a condition of new nuclear supply. This condition is in our view vital in assisting the IAEA to discharge its responsibilities in verifying that nuclear transfers are used for peaceful purposes only.
Strengthened export controls are directly relevant to curbing the recently uncovered illicit trafficking in sensitive nuclear equipment and technology. New Zealand is very concerned about these revelations, and endorses the IAEA Director General's call for all states to cooperate fully in helping to identify the supply routes and sources of the technology, equipment and materials.
Effective physical protection of nuclear material and facilities is also an important factor in strengthening the non-proliferation regime and we would urge continuing efforts in this regard. Two years ago New Zealand acceded to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and we call on all those States who are not yet party to do likewise as soon as possible. We support current efforts to strengthen the Convention, and look forward to a successful outcome at the Diplomatic Conference to be held in July. I want also to affirm New Zealand's full support for the IAEA's Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, the Action Plan, and the import and export guidance under the Code. We call upon all States party to make a political commitment both to the Code and to the guidance under it.
Mr. Chairman
Nuclear weapons programmes of states outside the NPT seriously undermine nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. In regions of tension these pose real risks to international peace and security. We call upon India, Pakistan and Israel to accede to the NPT promptly and without conditions, and to place all their nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards.
We deplore the decision of North Korea in January 2003 to announce its withdrawal from the NPT, and express the utmost concern over its declaration in February this year that it has manufactured, and possesses, nuclear weapons. This situation is a grave threat to the peace and security of the region. We urge North Korea to reconsider the course that it has chosen, to return to the NPT, and to honour its safeguards obligations with the IAEA. We call upon North Korea to abandon any nuclear weapons programme immediately. We believe that a solution can be found through peaceful dialogue, and urge North Korea to return to the six party talks without delay.
New Zealand also expresses serious concern that Libya for a number of years was in breach of Article II of the NPT and of its obligations under its Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA. We welcome Libya's decision in December 2003 to abandon its programme of weapons of mass destruction, its subsequent signing of an Additional Protocol, and its full cooperation with the IAEA in relation to verification that all Libya's nuclear activities are now for exclusively peaceful purposes.
We are also concerned Mr. Chairman that Iran has recently been revealed to have had an undeclared, clandestine, nuclear programme in place over almost two decades. We are further concerned that it has been found to have breached a number of its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the IAEA. We call upon Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA in resolving the outstanding issues in the Agency's investigations into its nuclear programme. We welcome Iran's decision to sign an Additional Protocol and act as if it were in force, and urge it to complete ratification without delay. We call upon Iran to implement all requirements of the IAEA Board resolutions, including voluntary suspension of all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, in order to rebuild international confidence that its nuclear programme is for peaceful uses only. New Zealand supports fully the European Union initiative relating to the negotiation of long-term arrangements with Iran, and the provision of objective guarantees that its nuclear programme is for peaceful purposes only.
Mr. Chairman
New Zealand maintains that a powerful symbol for demonstrating renunciation of WMD to the international community is the reach, and potential reach, of nuclear weapon free zones over the landmasses of the globe. New Zealand is a member of the Rarotonga Treaty, which establishes a nuclear weapon free zone in the South Pacific.
Nuclear weapon free zones can act as disarmament measures, providing an incentive for nuclear-armed or aspiring states to pull back from the nuclear option. Nuclear weapon free zones also contribute to non-proliferation efforts. For example; in the Rarotonga Treaty's Article IV, which addresses peaceful nuclear activities, each Party undertakes to "support the continued effectiveness of the international non-proliferation system based on the NPT and the IAEA safeguards system".
New Zealand welcomed Mexico's initiative to hold a meeting of states parties and signatories to nuclear weapon free zones in April. This provided a valuable opportunity to explore ways of strengthening communication networks between the zones. In this respect, New Zealand works with Brazil to promote an initiative for a nuclear-weapon-free Southern Hemisphere, which would link up the existing regional zones to encompass the entire hemisphere. A nuclear- weapon-free Southern Hemisphere would facilitate co-ordination and cooperation between the respective nuclear weapon free zones in areas such as verification, compliance and disarmament.
Finally Mr. Chairman, New Zealand considers there is merit in examining institutional arrangements for the review of the NPT, to try to ensure maximum effectiveness. We are interested in the Canadian and other proposals coming forward in this regard.

