Cluster I1 statement, Norway, April 2013

Mr. Chair,
The primary objective for all state parties to the NPT must be to ensure the
realization of its goals and its full implementation. In our previous interventions
in this meeting, we have pointed out that the humanitarian impact of nuclear
detonations should motivate the full imple~nentationof the NPT agenda and the
20 10 Action Plan. Thus, the relevance of the humanitarian perspective is not

limited to disarmament, but is of course equally relevant in issues pertaining to
non-proliferation, nuclear security and nuclear safety.
Today, it is fair to say that the NPT is under strain, with pressing proliferation
concerns related to the Islamic republic of Iran, Syria and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Norway urges these countries to heed the calls by
the international community, expressed through the UN Security Council and
the IAEA, and fully comply with their obligations. We strongly condemn the
recent missile launch and nuclear test undertaken by the DPRK, in direct
violation of several Security Council resolutions and accompanied by recltless
threats to use nuclear weapons. Aggressive acts such as these are not in the
interest of the DPRK or in the interest of the North Korean people. It constitutes
grave challenges of the norm established by the CTBT and of the nonproliferation regime itself. We urge the DPRK to not talte further provocative
and destabilizing actions and to comply with all its international obligations
including the most recent SCR 2094, adopted unanimously tlie 7ill of.. March.
In relation to Iran's nuclear programme, we note that Iran has still not made it
possible for the IAEA to state that its nuclear progranine is for peacerul
purposes only, in spite of numerous efforts by the IAEA to have the outstanding
issues in this regard clarified. Iran has also continued its enrichment and

1i

reprocessing activities, being in breach with its international obligations,
including Security Council resolution 1696. The righ.t to peaceful use of nuclear
technology is clearly recognized by Norway. However, the continued lack of
progress on issues related to possible military uses are of very serious concern.
The IAEA and the Security Council are tasked to verify that peaceful uses are
precisely that. We therefore sincerely hope that the meeting scheduled for May

15'" between the IAEA and Iran, will finally enable us to see a way forward
towards a solution to the outstanding issues between Iran and the international
community in this field.
Mr Chair,
Safeguards should continue to be at the centre of our efforts in the pursuit of an
efficient non-proliferation architect~re.Safeguards are essential to ensure that all
nuclear activities are devoted to peaceful activities only.
Norway reaffirms that the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards and the Additional
Protocol constitute the verification norm. Indeed, it is high time that we fully
universalise these instruments. Great progress has been made in this regard in
recent years. 119 countries now have in force the IAEA's Additional Protocol.
But we are not quite there. 13 countries do not even have in place a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement. Norway remains convinced that it is in
the interest of every country to conclude safeguards agreements, including an
Additional Protocol, also because it will make them better positioiled to take
part in peaceful nuclear cooperation.
,

We would also use this opportunity to express our support to the evolution of
safeguards implementation to a State level concept, based on the consideration
of all credible and safeguards relevant information about a State. In our view,
this would ensure effectiveness and efficiency in the face of the ever-increasing
quantities of nuclear material that needs to be safeguarded. We want the IAEA

c

to work, and we want it to spend its time and resources in the manner that best
serves the purposes of the agency, in the interest o l us all.
Mr Chair,
We need to continue working on the nuclear security agenda. Our achievements,
as well as the worlc still to be done, were highlighted at the Nuclear Security
Summit in Seoul last year, giving new political impetus to our efforts in this
regard.
Norway has for some years advocated that minimising the use of highly
1

enriched uranium will strengthen our overall non-proliferation efforts, not least
in preventing non-state actors from acquiring material which may be used in a
crude nuclear device.
We are convinced that it is possible from both a technological and financial
perspective to convert most of existing nuclear installations to use low enriched
uranium. Indeed, very many civilian research reactors have already been
converted from highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium as fuel.
We should utilize this momentum. We would suggest loolting more actively into
nuclear fuel cycle approaches with a view to finding solutions which

'

E

accommodate ournon-proliferation concerns, while at the same time facilitating
peacehl uses. Enhanced multilateral fuel cycle cooperation would serve all
pillars of the NPT.
Mr Chair,
Today, there is growing recognition all over the world that global security and
non-prolileration would be enhanced by the elimination of nuclear weapons and by a comprehensive ban on testing them. Recent developments have
reminded us all too clcarly about this necessity. Altl~oughtlie CTBT has not

formally entered into force, it has already established a fundamental norm of
non-testing. Yet, a test moratorium can never be a substitute for a
comprehei~sive,universally binding legal agreement. Norway urges those States
that have not yet signed or ratified the Treaty to do so without further delay, in
particular the eight remaining States listed in Annex 2 to the CTBT.
Export control regimes and mechanisms are another important area to promote
the global non-proliferation norm. That is the intention of the NSG and the
Zangger Committee. Norway calls on all states parties to adopt and enforce
adequate national export control legislation, in accordance with UN Security
Council Resolution 1540.
The existing regional nuclear weapons free zones are important contributors to
effective non-proliferation, and efforts to expand existing zones and promote the
establishment of new ones should be intensified. Norway reiterates its support to
the work done towards establishing a zone free of Weapons of Mass Destruction
in the Middle East. We express our sincere hope that the current obstacles be
overcome and progress made towards this end.

Mr. Chair,

As a member of the Vienna Group or 10 countries I would also like to take this
opportunity to highlight the three worlting papers submitted by the Group
relating to cluster 11, on the topics CTBT, Verification and Compliance, and
Export controls.
Thank you

