NEW ZEALAND

PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER TWO DEBATE
STATEMENT BY H.E. DEBORAH GEELS
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN VIENNA
26 APRIL 2013

Check against delivery
Mr Chairman
The last few months have clearly shown why an effective non-proliferation regime is a prerequisite
for a world free of nuclear weapons, and essential to ensuring the peace and security of all regions.
As States Parties to the NPT it is vitally important that we continue to focus on such issues and
discuss them in a spirit of openness. Both transparency and accountability are fundamental concepts
that underpin the NPT and the international safeguards system. In turn, this system provides
assurances of compliance and creates the stable international environment necessary to allow for
the full realisation of the Treaty's goals.
Mr Chairman
At the heart of these assurances is the International Atomic Energy Agency, which plays a key role
through its robust verification that nuclear activities undertaken by states are solely for peaceful
purposes. The integrity of IAEA verification practice is central to the assurances we seek through
the international nuclear non-proliferation framework.
To achieve these assurances New Zealand believes that an Additional Protocol should always feature
as a condition of new supply arrangements for nuclear and associated material. We encourage all
countries that have not yet done so - particularly those with significant nuclear activities - to
conclude and bring into force an Additional Protocol without delay. We urge those states remaining
outside the NPT safeguards system to remedy this situation as a matter of priority.
In 2001, the IAEA assessed New Zealand to be in full compliance with all its safeguards
commitments. With no nuclear weapons, no nuclear energy generation, no nuclear reactors and no
production of uranium or other relevant material, New Zealand has only very minor activities subject
to safeguards. In this regard New Zealand is supportive of the IAEA's decision, and its efforts, to
modify the Small Quantities Protocol to address weaknesses in the safeguards system, and we are
now in the process of finalising our own domestic processes to enable adoption of a modified SQP in
the near future. We encourage others to do likewise.

1

New Zealand also emphasises the important role that effective export controls play in the wider
international non-proliferation framework and the assurances that support it. New Zealand applies
export controls to materials and dual-use goods which can be used in a nuclear weapons programme
and co-ordinates these measures with other members of the Nuclear Suppliers Group. In this
regard we welcome the increasing adherence to the NSG guidelines as a symbol of our growing
collective commitment to the non-proliferation framework.
Mr Chairman
The current global situation presents us all with a number of increasingly intractable compliance
challenges which threaten to undermine the very effectiveness of the international non-proliferation
regime. As States Parties we need to continue to recognise and address these challenges.
Mr Chairman
Iran's continued non-compliance with UN Security Council and IAEA resolutions remains of deep
concern.
The international community is in a difficult situation. The Agency has now held nine rounds of talks
with Iran and in May last year the Director General himself flew to Tehran. These nine rounds are in
addition to the Agency's many discussions held with Iran since 2007. The IAEA Board of Governors
has now passed twelve resolutions on Iran and, in addition, the Security Council has passed six
separate resolutions on this issue.
Mr Chairman
Such intensive and concerted international action and dialogue should have provided some
reassurance or, at least, some substantive answers from Iran. But there has been no reassurance,
and few answers. Accordingly New Zealand, like many others here, remains troubled as to Iran's
intentions and for us many outstanding questions remain.
Without further information the international community and the IAEA cannot be assured of Iran's
peaceful intentions. Iran must urgently prioritise its cooperation. Its current approach of stalled
progress and avoidance is an inadequate response to the IAEA's legally mandated and technically
well-founded requests.
New Zealand once again calls on Iran to take the necessary steps to reassure us all of its peaceful
intentions, to engage substantively with the Agency and to urgently answer the many outstanding
questions on the possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
Mr Chairman
That North Korea continues to blatantly defy the international community and multilateral
institutions is of deep concern and represents a significant threat to peace and security in our
region.
DPRK's nuclear tests of 9 October 2006, 25 May 2009, and most recently that of 12 February 2013,
seriously undermine the international non-proliferation regime and breach both Security Council and
IAEA Board resolutions, to which New Zealand is strongly committed. DPRK's recent actions have
done nothing to credibly resolve this issue.
New Zealand continues to urge North Korea to abandon its nuclear and missile programmes, and to
instead focus its energy on improving the lives of its people and engaging constructively with the
international community. We must all continue to send a strong message to North Korea that this
dangerously provocative path is a dead end.
2

Mr Chairman
Syria remains in breach of its international obligations, including its commitments under its
Safeguards Agreement. There are serious outstanding questions regarding the overall purpose of the
Syrian nuclear programme.
New Zealand calls upon Syria to urgently remedy its non-compliance with its Safeguards Agreement,
noting that the ongoing conflict there should not be used to justify any delay and does not mean
Syria should not have to live up to its international obligations.
Syria must provide the access and information needed to allow the Agency to verify that all nuclear
materials there are properly accounted for and the exclusively peaceful nature of Syria's nuclear
programme.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand is a strong advocate of nuclear-weapon-free zones and the role they play in promoting
and safeguarding regional and international peace and stability, supporting global disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts, and reinforcing the NPT itself.
That 60% of the world's states are covered by nuclear-weapon-free zones, including all states of the
Southern Hemisphere, is a singular achievement. It is a powerful demonstration of the collective will
that can exist at a regional level to rid the world of nuclear weapons. We look forward to increasing
cooperation among existing zones and to the creation of further zones.
In this connection, New Zealand welcomes the reaffirmation at the 2010 RevCon of the 1995
Resolution on the Middle East and the agreement to convene a Conference on the establishment of a
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
It remains the case that by convening a Conference participants can start to lay the groundwork for
a robust agreement that includes all states of the region, and that lives up to the expectations of
1995.

New Zealand would like to note our strong support for the initiative to convene the Conference and
for the significant efforts undertaken so far by the Finnish government and Under-Secretary
Laajava.
We regret that the Conference did not take place in 2012, and we continue to calion the convenors,
the facilitator and the States of the region to exert all efforts to ensure that the Conference is
convened as soon as possible.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand strongly believes that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are inextricably
linked. We look forward to a full and frank discussion on cluster two issues as our debate unfolds.
Action on both fronts is essential for the realisation of our collective goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

3

