NEW ZEALAND
Statement by

H.E. Nicole Roberton
Permanent Representative, Vienna

atthe

2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster"

Vienna, May 2017

Mr Chair
As a long-standing and committed advocate of nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, New Zealand was disappointed that the NPT membership was
unable in 2015 to set an ambitious agenda to strengthen and implement this
cornerstone Treaty over this five-year period. We do not, however, interpret
this failure as signalling any reduction in States Parties' commitment to the
Treaty and implementation across all pillars. Indeed, we approach this week's
debate as an opportunity to, purposefully and constructively, restate our
collective view that an effective global nuclear non-proliferation regime is
fundamental to building a secure world.
I would like to make five main points today, focusing primarily on the critical role
of the NPT's safeguards system. Firstly, New Zealand wishes to underscore that
the NPT safeguards system, with its core objectives of transparency and
accountability, is vital for the global non-proliferation regime. The integrity of
the International Atomic Energy Agency's verification activities is fundamental
to the assurances New Zealand seeks that nuclear activities undertaken by
states are solely for peaceful purposes.
We have seen some significant progress in the resolution of safeguards issues
over the last few years, notably the agreement with Iran of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). New Zealand views the JCPOA as a truly
critical agreement, reminding us that even seemingly intractable issues can be
resolved through diplomacy and dialogue. We all have a stake in the faithful
implementation, and success, of the JCPOA and so we are pleased to announce
that New Zealand will contribute another NZD150,000 towards the IAEA's
monitoring and verification activities in Iran.
Secondly, in contrast, we have also observed serious proliferation challenges.
New Zealand is dismayed at the DPRK's nuclear tests, in blatant defiance of the
international community, as well as IAEA Board and UN Security Council
Resolutions.

New Zealand calls on DPRK to abandon its nuclear and missile

programmes and to re-engage in dialogue to achieve the denuclearisation of the
Korean peninsula.
Thirdly, New Zealand believes it is important to continue to strengthen the
application of safeguards and encourage other states to do the same.

In particular, New Zealand believes that an Additional Protocol should always
feature as a condition of new supply arrangements for nuclear and associated
material. We are pleased with the increasing number of states signing onto the
Additional Protocol. We encourage all countries that have not yet done so particularly those with significant nuclear activities - to conclude and bring into
force an Additional Protocol without delay.
Fourthly, New Zealand recognises the important contribution to nuclear nonproliferation of effective export controls.

New Zealand welcomes - and

contributes to - the valuable role that the Nuclear Suppliers Group and Zangger
Committee play in supporting the fundamental non-proliferation objectives of
the NPT, to which we are all committed.

It is NZ's view that the NPT is the

cornerstone of these export control regimes and this guides our participation in
these groups.
Fifthly, New Zealand has for more than 30 years advocated for Nuclear Weapon
Free Zones and the role they play in promoting and safeguarding regional and
international peace and stability, supporting global disarmament and nonproliferation efforts, and reinforcing the NPT itself.
New Zealand is proud to stand with 60% of the world's states covered by
nuclear-weapon-free zones, including all states of the Southern Hemisphere.
This is a powerful demonstration of the collective will that can exist at a regional
level to rid the world of nuclear weapons.

We look forward to increasing

cooperation among existing zones and to the creation of further zones.
In this regard, we again reaffirm our strong support for the initiative to establish
a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction. Only by doing so can the path be laid for an agreement which lives
up to the expectations of 1995.
Mr Chair
In closing, New Zealand's commitment to disarmament and non-proliferation is
deep and enduring, stemming from our strong belief that nuclear weapons do
not make the world a safer place. New Zealand strongly believes that nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are inextricably linked and that action on
both fronts is essential for the realisation of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Thank you Mr Chair.

