Mr, Chairman,
At the outset 1 would like to join our colleagues who have expressed their heartfelt congratulations on 3'our election as Chairman for Main Committee II. We are confident that under your able and experienced leadership we will be able to achieve progress towards addressing what are undoubtedly some of the most challenging issues under the Treaty. We also warmly welcome the election of Ms. Alison Kelley as Chair of our Subsidiary Body, and have full confidence in her stewardship.
The Philippines associates itself with the views expressed by Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) (ASRAN) Cur delegation also wishes to emphasize that our work during the Review Conference must strike a balance among the three pillars of the NPT.
We would also like to quote from our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, who wrote that "He who does not know how to look not • he came from will never get to his destination/ Accordingly, the under :	! courses of action that were agreed
upon in past Review Conferences, pr j; : ;v '.he 1995 and 2000 NPT RevCons must be recalled, brought forward and implemented.
The Philippine delegation would like this opportunity to outline its priorities and recommendations for this Com; "	its Subsidiary Body:
1. The 1995 Resolution on the which provides for, inter alia, the establishment of a Nuclear Weapons free Zone (NWFZ) in the region must be implemented as soon as possible. holding of an international conference on the Middle East should be	the earliest possible time.NFWZs should be fortified by the accession of all relevant states in each zone, particularly by Nuclear Weapons States (NWS). New Zones should be established in other regions and sub-regions of the world.
The IAEA's Non-Proliferation framework can be advanced through the conclusion of more bilateral Additional Protocol (AP) agreements with the
The IAEA's nuclear verification capability should be strengthened, through the provision of appropriate legal tools and operational resources.
We must prioritize the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), and pending its entry into force, a moratorium on nuclear testing should be observed.
Another priority is the commencement of work on a Treaty on Fissile Materials at the earliest opportunity.
The NPT regime must have an improved institutional implementation and continuity framework. Our dc! ': alien feels that the Review Conference President can contribute meaningfully to the process of continuity between RevCons, and that the of the regime needs to be enhanced through the establishment of a dedicated implementation support mechanism. The proposals which have been put forward by States Parties provide a good basis for our v, :
Mr. Chairman,
The Philippine Delegation looks forward to engaging with you and our fellow
States Parties in the coming days, r	1 fn 1 < • c great expectations the community of nations have for the success of our
Thank you.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



