Please check against delivery

PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
1st Meeting of the Preparatory Commission of the NPT
02-12 May 2017
Cluster 2: Non-Proliferation
Specific Issue – Regional issues, including with respect to the Middle East and
implementation of the 1995 Middle East Resolution

Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Philippines, as a State that renounces war as an instrument of foreign policy and
champions international peace and security, believes in a world free of nuclear
weapons. We, therefore, support a robust global disarmament and non-proliferation
framework, and in this regard have consistently pushed for a strong and universal
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Article II Section 8 of the Philippine Constitution is the foundation of our policy on the
prohibition of nuclear weapons within our territory. From this policy, we derive the
Philippines’ goals of maintaining international and regional peace and stability,
promoting a nuclear weapon-free world, and ensuring our country’s and the Filipino
people’s protection from the threat or use of weapons of mass destruction wherever
they may be.
The Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons convened since
2013 have concluded that the world has no capacity to address, in an adequate and
immediate manner, the humanitarian emergency or long-term consequences that will
ensue after a nuclear weapon detonation.
We have a shared responsibility to ensure the protection of all lives and placing high
value on the human condition without favor or discrimination.
It is for these reasons that the Philippines supports non-proliferation initiatives that will
have to go hand in hand with our nuclear disarmament efforts.

Article VII of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) states: “Nothing in this Treaty
affects the right of any group of States to conclude regional treaties in order to assure
the total absence of nuclear weapons in their respective territories“.
The Philippines also recalls Action Point 9 of the 2010 NPT Review Conference Final
Document’s 64-Point Action Plan, which enjoins relevant States to facilitate “the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones” which is a critical aspect in the promotion
of the treaty’s goals.
As State Party to the Bangkok Treaty or the Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapons Free
Zone and as a nation that believes in the importance of a future world free of nuclear
weapons and all types of weapons of mass destruction, the Philippines is fully
committed to further strengthening this Treaty. We welcome continued dialogue
between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the five nuclear
weapon states as regards their signing of the Protocol of the Bangkok Treaty.
With this clear in our minds, the Philippines has been consistently calling for the
implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East which provides, among
others, the establishment of a nuclear weapons free zone in the region.
Mr. Chair,
The Philippines fully supports ongoing efforts to convene a Conference of a Middle East
Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons. The preponderance of similar regional security regimes
– The Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone – is
evidence that it can be achieved.
We firmly believe that a vital step in achieving complete nuclear disarmament and the
irreversible disposal of nuclear arsenals is the incremental establishment and
institutionalization of regional nuclear weapons free regimes. A nuclear weapons free
Middle East will be a stellar example for the world and may serve as a nexus to future
regional disarmament and non-proliferation arrangements.
We achieved a diplomatic feat at the 2010 NPT Review Conference when we agreed to
convene a Conference in 2012 on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of
Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction.
It is with deep regret that we have failed to implement this agreement and it is with even
deeper regret that this issue has dogged our work on nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in the past years.

The Philippines will lend its strong support for processes that aim to undertake the
establishment of more regional nuclear-weapon-free-zones, including the Middle East.
We hope that concerned States remain faithful to their commitments and contribute to
the promotion of continuous discourse on the Middle East. We continue to aspire for our
progeny a world with lasting peace, without the looming uncertainty and despair brought
about by nuclear weapons.
Just as diplomacy and dialogue allowed us to come to an agreement in 2010, the
Philippines hopes that the same diplomatic spirit will drive us as we try to resolve this
outstanding issue in the 2020 Review Conference.
In closing, the Philippines expresses hope that the 2020 NPT RevCon would be a step
forward from 2015, with concrete efforts to build upon the gains made in 2010 and
pursue implementation of the 64-Point Action Plan with new life and vigor.
The Philippines once again reaffirms its commitment to the NPT and the enforcement of
related legal instruments on disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
Thank you.

