PHILIPPINES
PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
Main Committee II (Nuclear Non-Proliferation)
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
05 May 2015
United Nations, New York

Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines congratulates you on your election as Chairman of Main
Committee II and assure you of our full support and cooperation.
The Philippines associates itself with the statement delivered by Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and supports the Working Papers
submitted by the Movement on the topics under this Main Committee and its
Subsidiary Body.
Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines cannot overemphasize the importance of the Middle East
region which has become a second home to millions of our people. We are one
with the peoples of the region in aspiring for real and lasting peace. Yet, we are
cognizant of the challenges and the necessity of taking incremental steps toward
the achievement of that noble goal.
With this in mind, we have been consistently calling for the immediate
implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East which provides,
among others, the establishment of a nuclear weapons free zone in the region.
We achieved a diplomatic feat at the 2010 NPT Review Conference when
we agreed to convene a Conference in 2012 on the Establishment of a Middle
East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction.
It is with deep regret that we have failed to implement this agreement. It is
with even deeper regret that this issue has hounded our work on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation for the past three years.
PHILIPPINE MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

556

FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY

10036 •

TEL.

(212) 764-1300 •

FAX

(212) 840-8602

Since 2012, the Philippines has been appealing to the Secretary-General
and the co-sponsors of the 1995 Resolution, in consultation of the States of the
region, to convene the Conference at the soonest time possible, under the terms
set by the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
These terms include the attendance to the Conference by all States of the
Middle East, with the agenda of the establishment of a Middle East zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the region, and with the full
support and engagement of the nuclear-weapon States.
Despite the blame game that ensued since 2012, tireless efforts by the
Facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko Laajava, continued. The Philippines commends
and thanks Ambassador Laajava for his hard work.
Just as diplomacy and dialogue allowed us to come to an agreement in
2010, we hope that the same will guide and drive us as we try to resolve this
outstanding issue in this Review Conference.
Currently, only 39 percent of the world's population lives in nuclear
weapon free zones. We are not even halfway to the goal and much still remains
to be done. A nuclear weapon free Middle East will be a significant and important
addition to the world's nuclear weapons free zones once it is established.
The Philippines believes these nuclear weapon free zones will be for
naught if those who possess the weapons are not Parties to the Treaties that
established the zones.
We call on the nuclear weapon States to sign and ratify the Protocols to
these Treaties, including the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone where
the Philippines is a State Party to, as soon as possible and without reservations.
Mr. Chairman,
Over the years the International Energy Atomic Agency (IAEA) has been
at the forefront of global non-proliferation efforts.
The Philippines has been calling for the strengthening of the Agency's
non-proliferation framework through the conclusion of more Comprehensive
Safeguard Agreements and the universalization of Additional Protocols. The
Agency's nuclear verification capability will also be reinforced through the
provision of appropriate legal tools and operational resources. All these are
imperative to ensure the Agency's effectiveness in guarding against proliferation.
Thank you .

