Mr. Chairman,
First of all I wish to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation on your election to the Chairman of the Main Committee II of the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to offer you our full support and cooperation for the fulfillment of your important duties.
Poland adheres fully to the European Union statement presented in this Committee. In addition to this Poland would like to present, in its national capacity, a couple of specific issues regarding the safeguards system of the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
The 2000 NPT Review Conference Final Document has recognized the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards - being a fundamental pillar of the nuclear non- proliferation - as an element which plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Conference also reaffirmed that the implementation of comprehensive Safeguards Agreements together with Additional Protocols is designed to provide credible assurance about the non-diversion of nuclear materials from declared activities. Nevertheless, there is still a need to continue to strengthen the multilateral instruments in the field of non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control as well as to promote universal adherence to them and their effective implementation. The model additional protocol to the safeguards agreement constitutes in that area a major accomplishment which will help building trust that all states comply with non-proliferation commitments. Additional protocols are an integral part of the IAEA safeguards system and we consider that adherence to them is mandatory in the light of Article III of the NPT. Poland has several times expressed such an opinion during the IAEA Board of Governors and General Conference sessions. Having both above legal instruments signed, ratified and in force, Poland calls upon the countries which have not yet done so to join the integrated IAEA safeguards system as soon as possible.
The safeguards system - to reach its final goal - has to be combined with a proper physical protection regime, including an application of different mechanisms providing elimination of any danger coming from using of nuclear materials and radioactive sources which have escaped from the nationally controlled or internationally verified systems. This is why it is so essential to build a proper regime of physical protection of radioactive sources and of nuclear materials during the entire fuel cycle, and to undertake all the possible actions against illicit trafficking of such substances. Poland welcomes the IAEA activities in the field of prevention, detection and response undertaken in support of efforts against that so called "nuclear terrorism". Therefore, Poland has been actively supporting the IAEA efforts aimed at amending the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials. We believe that the Diplomatic Conference planned in July 2005 will lead to the adoption of the amendments to the Convention on Physical Protection extending the application of the Convention to cover also physical protection of nuclear installations and the national transport of nuclear materials. We consider very important that the physical protection of nuclear material in domestic use, storage and transport as well as the protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities against sabotage will be covered by the Convention provisions.
Mr. Chairman,
In the context of various factors which could contribute to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime all over the world, one must not ignore the importance of another mechanism of the system - the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). Poland, as a State Signatory with the completed ratification process, being at the same time one of the 44 states whose ratification is necessary for the CTBT entry into force, would like to believe that the organization every two years of the Article XIV Review Conference will approach us in the near future significantly to the CTBT entry into force.
Mr., Chairman,
Taking into account the last developments discussed during the IAEA Board of Governors sessions, it is worth underlining the initiative concerning the creation of a Special Committee on Safeguards and Verification. Poland associates herself with the European Union statement on that matter expressing the broad support for that initiative which enhances multilateral efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. There is no doubts about the objectives identified to be achieved through the Special Committee activities, however, details regarding its mandate, composition and duration still need to be clarified, in particular in relation to the complexity of the issue.
Among other international initiatives which have appeared recently we should mention the Global Threat Reduction Initiative (GTRI). It is intended to provide international support for countries' national programmes to identify, secure, recover and facilitate the disposition of vulnerable high risk nuclear and other radioactive materials that pose a threat to the international community. Poland strongly supports that proposal. Our delegation attended the GTRI International Partners' Conference in Vienna in September last year; after the Conference Poland proposed its only MARIA research reactor to be included in the programme of the reactor fuel conversion from highly/medium enriched uranium (36% at the moment) to low enriched uranium (below 20%). We wish that that the implementation of that initiative with regard to Poland would take place as soon as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
