REPUBLIC OF POLAND
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

750 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017

TEL. (212) 744-2506

Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY

MR. DAMIAN PRZENIOSŁO
HEAD OF THE WMD NON-PROLIFERATION
AND DISARMAMENT POLICY DIVISION

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)
MAIN COMMITTEE II

NEW YORK, MAY 4TH, 2015

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset let me congratulate you on your appointment as the Chair of the Main
Committee 2. I wish to assure you of the Polish Delegation´s full support and
cooperation in fulfilment of your important mandate.
Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union.
I would also like to draw your attention to the relevant working papers submitted by the
Non-proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
At the same time, I would like to refer to some elements related to the nuclear nonproliferation, we consider particularly important from the national perspective.

Ladies and Gentlemen,
Poland considers all three pillars of the NPT as equally important and their balanced
implementation crucial as achieving main goals of the treaty.
Full compliance with commitments remain essential element of the entire NPT
architecture.
In this regard, we would like to highlight the importance of the safeguards system and,
in particular, the Additional Protocol as it represents the highest standard of verification
and safeguard. Therefore, we call on States that have not yet concluded an Additional
Protocol to do so as soon as possible. We strongly support efforts towards full
universalisation of this important instrument.
We also encourage all members to fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, inter alia, by hosting various missions of the IAEA, such as Integrated
Regulatory Review Service (IRRS), Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review (INIR)
and International Physical Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS).
With regard to export controls, we support relevant initiatives aimed at sharing best
practices and lessons learned, including through the implementation of the UN Security
Council resolution 1540. We would like to recall in this context a bilateral, PolishCroatian 1540 peer review conducted between our countries in 2013.

Mr. Chairman,
On April 2nd, in Lausanne, an important framework agreement on Iran’s nuclear
programme has been reached. The willingness declared by the negotiators to reach a
comprehensive agreement raises hope that Iran’s relations with foreign partners will be
restored to their due rank. We would like the agreement to have a positive effect on the
situation in the whole Middle East region, helping to create an atmosphere of trust and
dialogue. We appeal to the negotiators to sustain the atmosphere of mutual trust, which
has been manifested by the compromise reached in Lausanne.
Poland continues to support all the efforts undertaken under the Framework for
Cooperation (FfC) between the IAEA and Iran. We note with satisfaction the resumption
of technical meetings between the two parties. We do hope this dialogue should help to
resolve, as soon as possible, all outstanding issues related to Iran's nuclear programme.
In the context of the Middle East peace process let me reinforce the words just expressed
by the representative of the EU. We fully support the establishment of a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in this region, in accordance
with the Resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review Conference. We
applaud efforts done by the Facilitator, Mr. Jaakko Laajava and his team aimed at
convening the conference on this issue. We note the progress and call all states
concerned to engage in further talks.
We join others in condemning the actions undertaken by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including nuclear and ballistic missiles tests, as violating
international norms and commitments. We urge DPRK to return to the NPT and IAEA
Safeguards as non-nuclear state.
Poland would like this conference to find consensus on the issue of withdrawal. As we
fully recognise rights provided by the Article X of the NPT, we are of the view that
concrete steps should be taken by the NPT Community, so those provisions will not be
misused. In this regard we would like to highlight two working papers on this issue:
submitted by the NPDI and by US.

Thank you.

