Statement by Mr. PARK Chul-min
Deputy Director-General for International Organizations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea
The Third Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Non-Proliferation
(Cluster II Issues)
1 May 2014
New York

<Check against Delivery>

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Nuclear nonproliferation is a fundamental goal of the NPT regime. My delegation believes that
ensuring full compliance with nonproliferation obligations is vital for sustaining and reinforcing
the credibility and integrity of the NPT regime. In addition to working towards enhancing the
universality of the Treaty, the international community should ensure that non-compliance with
NPT obligations will have clean and strong consequences.

Mr. Chairman,

We believe that Additional Protocols to the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
function as a crucial verification tool for non-proliferation obligations under the NPT. In this vein,
we underline the importance of the universal application of the Additional Protocol. We welcome
that 21 States have newly brought the Additional Protocols in force since the last Review
Conference. At this juncture, we urge those States Parties that have yet to conclude or bring into
force the Additional Protocol to do so without delay.

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation welcomes the positive developments in the negotiations between the P5+1 and
Iran, including the agreement of the Joint Plan of Action and its implementation. We look
forward to a final agreement and ultimately a comprehensive and complete solution. We hope
that such a process can have a positive influence on other outstanding non-proliferation issues.

Mr. Chairman,

North Korea’s nuclear program has not just posed a grave threat to the peace and security in the
region and beyond, but seriously undermined the integrity and credibility of the global nonproliferation regime. Instead of demonstrating its seriousness to abandon its nuclear program,
North Korea announced itself as a nuclear-weapon state in its revised constitution in April 2012
and adopted a national policy to develop nuclear arsenals and its economy simultaneously. It
reportedly restarted the operation of the 5 MWe reactor in Yongbyon and recently threatened
another nuclear test in its statement of March 30. We do not have much time to address this issue,
because North Korea is advancing its nuclear capability at this very moment. Moreover,
increasing unpredictability in Pyongyang’s behavior underscores the dire need to tackle North
Korea’s nuclear issue with a sense of urgency.

Violating relevant UN Security Council resolutions, North Korea has persistently attempted to be
acknowledged as a nuclear-weapon state. In addition, North Korea is the first case in the history
of the NPT where a country acquired nuclear technology as a NPT State Party and then abruptly
announced its withdrawal while continuing to develop nuclear weapons program. We must cope
with North Korea’s challenge to the non-proliferation regime squarely and collectively, by
stressing that a nuclear North Korea cannot be accepted in any case and discouraging North
Korea’s further provocations.

In this regard, the international community must make it clear in a unified and resolute manner
that we will not tolerate Pyongyang’s reckless and inexcusable acts, and we will have North
Korea pay the heavy price if North Korea goes ahead with another nuclear test. My delegation
urges North Korea to refrain from further provocative acts, but instead to abide by its obligations
under all relevant UN Security Council resolutions and comply with its commitments under the
Joint Statement of 19 September 2005 of the Six-Party Talks, by abandoning all its nuclear and
ballistic missile program in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. North Korea must
make strategic decision to abandon its nuclear program and return to the NPT and IAEA
safeguards at an early date. North Korea must realize that nuclear arsenal cannot guarantee its
security but rather further isolates it from the community of nations and deteriorates its economy.

Mr. Chairman,

Possible nuclear proliferation or use of nuclear weapons by non-state actors has emerged as one
of the most serious and imminent threats to global security of this century. In this vein, at The
Hague Nuclear Security Summit this past March, my President presented a holistic approach that

promotes synergy among nuclear security, nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
agendas.

Other relevant global efforts also contribute to preventing non-state actors from proliferating
nuclear weapons and related materials. As the current chair country of the UN Security Council
Resolution 1540 Committee, we are strongly committed to enhancing the implementation of the
Resolution. I am pleased to inform you that the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea, during
our presidency of the UN Security Council, will preside a high-level Security Council open
debate on non-proliferation, under the topic of “Commemorating the 10th Anniversary of
Resolution 1540 (2004) and Looking Ahead” on May 7. We hope that this open debate will
provide a unique opportunity to reflect on the progress achieved so far, and to exchange views on
developing a long-term vision and strategy toward achieving full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States.

Mr. Chairman,

The 2010 Action Plan has provided us with a reliable foundation for strengthening the NPT
regime. Through this Preparatory Committee, we must assess our progress thoroughly based on
the 2010 Action Plan and identify the areas where further work needs to be done. My delegation
looks forward to meaningful and substantive discussions in the process of our review cycle.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

/End/

