T l ~ eSecond Preparaloty Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferatio11 of Nuclear Weapons
April

2013, Geneva

I

Non-nroliferation
(Cluster 11)

Thanlc you, Mr. Chair~nan.

The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is the fundamental goal of the NPT regime. My
delegation firmly believes that this goal can be achieved only through harinony with the
other two pillars; nuclear disarinment and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

The Republic of Korea fully supports the nonproliferation coininitn~entsmade in the 20 10
Action Plan, First, my delegation underlines the importance of universal application of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol, which provide credible
assurances on the non-diversion of declared illaterials and the absence of undeclared
~llaterialsand activities, thereby promoting transparency and coilfidence among States. My
delegation therefore urges those States Parties that have not yet done so to ratify these
instruments.
Second, the Rel~ublicof Korea believes that the role of export control in preventing illicit
I

trade of sensitive nuclear materials, equipment, and technology needs to be further utilized
and enhanced. Robust export control arrai~gementswill effectively coniple~nentthe NPT
and the current non-proliferation regime.

'Third, collective efforts by the international co~llinunityare needed to prevent nuclear
terrorism, which has emerged as one of the most challenging threats to global security in the
21'' century. The best way to prevent ~luclearterroris111 is to put in place robust nuclear
security system worldwide to deny terrorists from gaining access to nuclear weapons,
inaterials and facilities.

I

(0
.:

~~

Tile Second Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Confere~lceof the
Parties to the Treaty on 1:heNon-Prolifet'ation of Nuclear Weaporls
April 2013, Geneva

~

~~~~

~

~

-

-

~

~

~~~

~

~

-

~

We support all relevant global efforts to strengthen i~uclearsecurity, including UN Security
Council Kesolution 1540, Global Initiative to Coinbat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), Global
Partnership, and Nuclear Security Summit process. The Seoul Nuclear Security Suinnlit
held in March 2012 put forward concrete coinnlitments and action measures to advance
nuclear security objectives, which include, inter alia, elimination of considerable anlount of
unneeded nuclear materials.
Fourth, to further strengthen the NPT regime, we need to address the pending issues of
withdrawal and non-coinpliance. The withdrawal issue deserves high attention by all State
Parties if we are to prevent further proliferatioil under the guise of the right to peaceful uses

4

of nuclear energy, as the case of the DPRK's nuclear weapoils prograin clearly illustrates.
My delegation will address this issue later on in our discussions.

Mr. Chairinan,
The 2010 Action Plan has provided us with a robust foundation for further strengthening the
NPT regiine. My delegation is of the view that through iinplementation of the Action Plan
over the last three years, states parties have contributed to the strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime. However, we have to address on-going and newly emerging
proliferation challenges around the world. My delegation believes that we should further
strengthen our effoi-ts to turn the Action Plan into concrete accoinplishnents by the 2015
Review Conference, and lool<s forward to substantive discussion in this regard at this
meeting.
Thank you, Mr Chair. /End/

(

1

