Statement by
Ambassador KWON Haeryong
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
to the Conference on Disarmament
At
The First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

7 May 2012, Vienna
Non-nroliferation (Cluster 11')
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is a fundamental goal of the NPT regime. My delegation firmly believes that
this goal can be achieved only when it is in harmony with the other two pillars of nuclear disarmament and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. We also believe that the increasing proliferation challenges faces can be effectively addressed
only through the concerted efforts of the State Parties.
The Action Plan put forth at the 2010 Review Conference encompasses a number of "to-do" lists in nuclear nonproliferation area. First, the universal application of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional
Protocol is essential in ensuring confidence in State Parties' compliance with their Treaty obligations. Based on this
framework, the IAEA will be able to provide credible assurances not only on the non-diversion of declared materials
but also on the absence of undeclared materials and activities, which will promote transparency and confidence among
states. My delegation urges those States Parties that have yet to conclude the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement or
the Additional Protocol to do so without further delay.
Secondly, effective and robust export controls play an important role in preventing nuclear proliferation, as such
controls regulate proliferation-prone nuclear items and technologies. My delegation appreciates the contribution made
by the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) in this regard, especially in providing states with guidelines to establish and
implement national policies on export controls. In addition, my delegation is of the view that the possible proliferation
of nuclear fieapons to non-state actors also poses a greater threat than ever before. The threat of nuclear terrorism
requires appropriate measures to prevent non-state actors from acquiring WMD's and their means of delivery. In this
context, my delegation believes that UN Security Council Resolution 1540 has provided an important legal framework
not only in reinforcing the non-proliferation regime but also in countering nuclear terrorism. My delegation also
welcomes the unanimous adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1977 last year which extended the mandate of
the 1540 Committee for ten additional years.
We would like to take note of the fact that, in accordance with Resolution 1540, all UN Member States have the
responsibility to "take and enforce effective measures IB establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation" of
nuclear Mieapons and their means of delivery. In this regard, my delegation hopes that the resolution on "Preventing and
Combating Illicit Brokering Activities." which has been introduced by Korea and Australia at the UN General
Assembly biennially since 2008. could be a meaningful contribution to the global efforts in this area.

Thirdly, the potential threat of nuclear terrorism is an issue which warrants our urgent attention, which is duly expressed
in the final document of 2010 NPT Review Conference. The Action Plan, from actions 40 to 46 and 59 to 64, requires
States Parties to the NPT to take measures to strengthen nuclear security. Sharing the international concern, the
Republic of Korea continues to play its part in ir.lternationa1 efforts within the framework of the Global Partnership, and
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) to prevent the spread of sensitive nuclear materials and
equipment and cornbat nuclear terrorism. I would also like to remind you that the Republic of Korea hosted the Plenary
of the GICNT in June 201 1 and the 2012 Seoul Nuclear Security Summit in March this year,
The Republic of Korea is confident and proud that the Seoul Summit contributed to combating nuclear and radiological
terrorism by achieving the consensus on the concrete actions and practical measures to strengthen nuclear security. To
be specific, the Seoul Communique provides important timelines for advancing nuclear security objectives, such as the
target year (end of 2013) for states to announce voluntary actions 011 minimizing the use of HEU and the goal year
(2014) for bringing the amended CPPNM into effect. Also, the Seoul Summit reaffirmed the need to address both the
issues of nuclear security and nuclear safety in a coherent manner for the sustainable peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In
addition, the Seoul Communique sets out specific measures to prevent radiological terrorism, an issue which was only
briefly touched upon at the Washington Summit. The Republic of Korea, as the host of the Seoul Summit and State
Party to the NPT, will continue to make efforts to implement the Action Plan and the Seoul Communiqut..
Fourthly, an early resolution of the DPRK nuclear issue is vital to ensuring the integrity of the global nuclear nonproliferation regime as well as to securing peace on the Korean Peninsula and beyond. Strenuous efforts have been
made to achieve the verifiable denuclearization of the DPRK in a peaceful manner through the Six-Party Talks.
However, it is extremely regrettable that despite these efforts, the DPRK has continued to develop its nuclear
programmes, including its uranium enrichment programme, which are in clear violation of UN Security Council
resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). Moreover, the DPRK carried out a missile launch last month, clearly
violating the UN Security Council resolutions. In the Statement, the UN Security Council strongly condemned the
launch by the DPRK and demanded that the DPRK abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner; immediately cease all related activities; and not conduct any further
launches that use ballistic missile technology, nuclear tests or any further provocation. The leadership of the DPRK
should realize that further provocations will only exacerbate its isolation.
Finally, the universality of the NPT still remains an unrealized goal. My delegation believes every effort to cope with
any challenges should begin with the basics, and the NPT regime is no exception. My delegation sincerely hopes our
efforts here will demonstrate that this regime provides meaningful benefits to participants, and encourage all states
outside the NPT to join us as non-nuclear weapon states.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation is of the vies that states parties have contributed to strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime
by faithfullq implementing the relevant 2010 Action Plan especially in the area of nuclear security and safety. However,
much needs to be done to address proliferation challenges around the world, My delegation believes that the 2012
PrepCom can lay an important grounduork for a stronger NPT regime in 2015 with the concerted efforts of all states
parties.
Thank you, /Endl

