Unofficial translation

Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations
inNewYmk

IlocrofilIHoe
npe,IJ,cramrre.JibCTBo
PoccMiicKoii <l>e,IJ,epfil(llli
npM OpramuaI(IIB
06ne,ll,lllieHHbIX HaI(Illi
B HbIO-HopKe

STATEMENT
by Mikhail I. Uliyanov
Acting Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
to the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Main Committee II)

New York, May 4, 2015

2

Mr. Chairman,
We consider the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons a primary
objective for the States Parties to the NPT; only through achieving it, a more
secure and stable world, in particular, a world free of nuclear weapons, as well
as step-by-step and effective social and economic development of States and
peoples, can be ensured.
It is encouraging that, shortly before our Conference, tangible progress
towards a solution on Iran's nuclear program was made at the talks in Lausanne.
We note with satisfaction that the responsible and creative approach taken by
the six international mediators as well as by Iran made it possible to reach
mutual understanding on a number of highly important issues, which give us
hope for a successful outcome of the negotiation process by June 30.
However, it would be premature to state that all challenges to the nonproliferation regime have been resolved. In particular, the nuclear problem in
the Korean Peninsula is still pending. Its solution can only be achieved by
political and diplomatic means within the Six-Party Talks.
The practice of the so-called nuclear sharing missions within NA TO
remains a matter of special concern in the NTP context. During these missions
representatives of non-nuclear Member States of the Alliance acquire skills of
applying nuclear weapons and participate in the nuclear planning process. We
consider it a clear violation of the NPT. As it is known, the Article I of the
Treaty forbids nuclear weapon States to transfer to any recipient whatsoever
nuclear weapons or control over such weapons directly, or indirectly. Article II
of the NPT, in tum, enjoins non-nuclear weapon States not to receive the
transfer from any transferor whatsoever of nuclear weapons or control over such
weapons directly or indirectly. References to the fact that such practice have
existed for over forty years are not valid. We call on NATO nuclear and non-

3

nuclear Member States concerned to abandon this practice, which causes serious
concern in the international community, as soon as possible, and bring their
policy in line with the letter and the spirit of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
One of the main objectives of the Review Conference is to take stock of
the interim results yielded by the efforts to convene the Conference on the
establishment of the Middle East zone free of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction (WMDFZ), and to agree on steps that could give a significant
impetus in that area.
As part of this work we need to carefully consider the documents
distributed at the Conference on this subject, in particular, Iranian, Israeli, and,
of course, first and foremost, a document of the Arab Group. Essentially, the
Arab document proposes a new approach to the convening of the Conference on
WMDFZ. It seems that the reason for such innovations is the deep
dissatisfaction with the current state of affairs, which, incidentally, we fully
share.
We are studying the proposals submitted by Arab countries with great
interest and care, but have yet fully elaborated our approach to it. First, we
would like to become more familiar with their arguments, and to hear opinions
of other countries. In principle, we do not exclude the possibility of making
certain adjustments in the Conference mandate agreed in 2010, naturally,
provided there is a consensus. At the same time, any novelties should seek to
establish the WMDFZ in practice. To achieve this goal it is vital that the
conference is attended by all the countries of the region and, more importantly
by all Middle East states, which have not yet acceded to the milestone
international agreements on non-proliferation - the NPT, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons.
Otherwise, efforts to establish the WMDFZ would be stalled.

4

In the remaining three weeks, we need to thoroughly analyze all options
and to reach the most effective solutions, building on gained experience and
possibly on new ideas and initiatives.
Mr. Chairman,
NPT States Parties' confidence in the IAEA safeguards is the key factor
m ensuring stability of the whole nuclear non-proliferation system. This
confidence has always relied on the impartial nature of the mechanism applied
by the Agency to verify the implementation of non-proliferation obligations, its
technical feasibility and political impartiality. The exclusive purpose of the
safeguards is to verify the States' compliance with their obligations under the
NPT.
In order to strengthen the Treaty, the IAEA safeguards system must
further meet the above-mentioned requirements. It is important to keep it
unaffected by politics and bias. The Agency's policy-making bodies, i.e. the
General Conference and the Board of Governors, should play a leading role in
making decisions on any changes in the IAEA safeguards system, monitoring
the Agency Secretariat's activities, and in case of detection by the Secretariat of
facts of State's non-compliance with its obligations under the NPT.
It is essential to focus verification efforts on materials and facilities that can

constitute a risk from the non-proliferation point of view. At the same time, the
handling of information on possible violations of non-proliferation obligations
received from third sources is the issue of special concern. Vigilance in using this
kind of information will help to avoid groundless accusations against the NPT
States Parties.
We note with satisfaction that in-depth discussions brought significant
changes to the content of the safeguards reform, they are considerably based on
the opinions of the Agency's Member States. In order to resolve the remaining
issues and concerns we urge the IAEA Secretariat to ensure as much as possible
the transparency in introducing changes to the procedure of the safeguards

5

implementation, to inform the policy-making bodies of the IAEA on the
planned steps in this field on regular basis, and to make changes to the
safeguards system solely with their approval. We expect the IAEA Director
General to submit a new comprehensive report on the state-level safeguards
concept that is being developed by the Secretariat.
The IAEA safeguard system will further be strengthened through the
universalization of the Additional Protocol that together with the Safeguards
Agreement should become the universally recognized standard in verifying the
States' compliance with their non-proliferation obligations. Acknowledging that
the adoption of the Additional Protocol remains purely voluntary, we call on
States that have not yet done so to conclude the Additional Protocol with the
Agency as soon as possible.
The introduction of the so-called integrated safeguards in the States that
concluded the Additional Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA
and in those States that received the Agency's confirmation on the absence of
undeclared nuclear material or activities in their territory, also promote the
effectiveness of the IAEA monitoring activities.
There are over thirty nuclear facilities in our country included in the list
for possible application of the Agency's safeguards, in accordance with the
Agreement between the USSR and the IAEA of February 21, 1985. Since
July 2010, the facility of the International Uranium Enrichment Centre in
Angarsk has been under the Agency's safeguards. In 2007, Russia ratified the
Additional Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA.
By implementing the national programme of scientific and technical
support of the safeguards, our country provides technical and financial support
to the Agency. For more than thirty years of its existence, large amount of work
aimed at strengthening the technical database of the Department of Safeguards
of the IAEA Secretariat has been done.
Under this programme, Russia provides the Agency with the assistance to

6

analyze in Russian laboratories environmental samples collected in the course
of inspection activities, as well as to develop new technologies to detect
undeclared nuclear material and activities. We devote particular attention to the
training of the IAEA inspectors, which goes beyond traditional methods of nondestructive control of nuclear material, but also includes inspections of uranium
enrichment plants. We continue the training of specialists from the IAEA
Secretariat and the IAEA Member States on accounting for and control of
nuclear material at the premises of the Russian specialized institutions.
Mr. Chairman,
In the context of implementing Article III of the NPT, Russia attaches
importance to the activities of the international export control regimes - the
Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). These regimes
demonstrated the possibility to effectively and on a discriminatory basis prevent
the risks of nuclear weapons proliferation without prejudice to the international
cooperation in the field of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The Russian Federation is building its national export control system on
the basis of the NSG and Zangger Committee guidelines and control lists.
Russia implemented in its national legislation rigorous but objective criteria,
governing transfers to non-nuclear weapon States of the most sensitive nuclear
equipment, material and technology, such as uranium enrichment and chemical
reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. The most important criterion is that the
importing State must be a Party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Moreover, one
of the obligatory conditions that Russia takes into account when deciding on
export of sensitive nuclear material and equipment is the effective Additional
Protocol to an IAEA Safeguards Agreement in an importing State.
Mr. Chairman,
In early April this year, the Group of Governmental Experts concluded its
work on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). An unprecedented in-depth
analysis of this issue was held, which was certainly useful. One of the

7

conclusions that can be drawn from the results of this work is that signing such
an agreement is long overdue. FMCT could have been a significant agreement
in the late 60s - early 70s. Over time, its 'added value' began to decline due to
the fact that four nuclear powers imposed voluntary moratoriums on the
production of fissile material and non-nuclear countries acceded to the NPT,
which actually bans the production of fissile materials. However, although such
a treaty can hardly be considered a priority, we believe that negotiations on this
issue could achieve some practical results. These negotiations should be
conducted in the framework of a balanced program of work at the Geneva
Conference on Disarmament and should be strictly based on "Shannon
Mandate" (document CD/1299).
We consider repatriation of fresh or spent highly enriched uranium fuel
from research reactors of Russian and American origin in third countries to be
an important area of cooperation for nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
security. During the implementation of the program, the total of 800 kg and
1346 kg of fresh and irradiated fuel respectively was exported from
14 countries.
Mr. Chairman,
The Russian Federation attaches great importance to ensurmg and
maintaining nuclear security not only on its territory but also around the world.
We fully comply with our international obligations in this area.
Russia is a party to all major international legal instruments in the field of
nuclear security, including the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, its 2005 Amendment, and the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We believe that adherence to these
legal instruments by States that have significant stockpiles of nuclear and
radioactive materials, is a priority in strengthening nuclear security worldwide.
States' participation in these international legal mechanisms is a key indicator of
their conformity with universally accepted international standards in the field of

8

nuclear security. In this regard, we call upon all States that have not yet acceded
to these conventions to do so.
We firmly believe in the fundamental and inviolable principle of a State's
responsibility for ensuring the efficiency and reliability of its national nuclear
security system, which determines its optimal parameters at its own discretion.
We stress the need to avoid imposing on States requirements that go beyond
international legal norms recognized by the international community. Any
international cooperation or assistance to States in establishing national
mechanisms on nuclear security can be carried out strictly at the State's request
and in accordance with its national legislation. In this regard, we appreciate the
outcomes of the IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety that took place
in July 2013.
We consistently support the central role of the Agency in coordinating
international cooperation in this area. We note the importance of providing the
Agency with adequate resources required for its activities. Russia has been
making voluntary contributions to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund since 2010,
and intends to continue this practice in the future.
Mr. Chairman,
Russia attaches great importance to enhancing security of information on
the protection system for nuclear materials and nuclear facilities. We are
convinced that too much transparency in this area may have grave
consequences.
All nuclear materials, storage facilities and installations in Russia, as well
as transport of nuclear and radioactive materials are protected with appropriate
security measures, in accordance with the national legislation and with the
account of the IAEA's recommendations. We constantly improve national
regulations in the field of accounting for and control of nuclear materials.
We pay special attention to enhancing nuclear security culture. In
November 2012, as well as in December 2013 and 2014, together with the

9

IAEA we organized international seminars in Obninsk, primarily for experts
from those countries which have just started using nuclear power. Courses and
seminars on physical protection are being held at the Global Nuclear Security
and Safety Institute at the National Research Nuclear University, and Tomsk
Polytechnic University. Over 500 foreign experts have completed training in the
field of control, account and physical protection of nuclear materials.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear terrorism continues to pose a threat to international security. In
this context, we support consistent implementation of the UNSC Resolution
1540 by all countries, aimed at countering WMD "black markets" and
preventing non-state actors, primarily terrorist organizations, from acquiring
such weapons and related materials, technologies and means of delivery. Russia
is taking an active part in the deliberations of the UNSC Committee established
to efficiently implement the UNSC Resolution 1540.
Russia and the United States launched the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism in 2006. The Initiative has become a major forum to
exchange best practices in countering nuclear terrorism and strengthening
nuclear security in the world. We are pleased to note that the number of
participants in the Initiative is growing. Today, 85 States participate in the
Initiative, with four international organizations acting as observers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

