
Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations Office and
Other International Organizations
in Geneva

STATEMENT
by Mikhail ULYANOV

Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
Director of the Department for Security Affairs and Disarmament
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
a t the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Block of issues I1 (non-proliferation and IAEA safeguards)

Geneva, April 20 13

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
Efficient functioning of the non-proliferation regime is a solid foundation for
achieving the common goal of making the world free of nuclear weapons in
accordance with the objectives set forth in the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
The application of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
safeguards in line with Article 111 of the Treaty by the non-nuclear-weapon States
party to the NPT, with the only purpose of verifying if they fulfill their obligations
under the Treaty, is an important element of securing this regime. Their application
is also an important prerequisite for international cooperation in the sphere of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and is a tool which helps build up confidence
among States.
Since its creation, the system of the IAEA safeguards has been continuously
improved on the basis of scientific and technological innovation in the sphere of
measuring nuclear materials and data processing. The model Additional Protocol
(INFCIRC/540) and the additional protocols to the agreements on comprehensive
safeguards signed with the NPT Member States and based on it has given the
IAEA an opportunity to verify whether the nuclear activity reports made by a State
are complete and to detect signs of undeclared nuclear materials and activities.
Without its application such verification is impossible. We recognize that the
conclusion of the Additional Protocol remains purely voluntary for an IAEA
Member State, which is why we are calling upon those States that have not signed

or ratified this instrument yet to do so as soon as possible. The Russian Federation
ratified the Additional Protocol in 2007 (Federal Law No. 227-FZ of 2 October,

2007).
Bearing in mind the importance of the Additional Protocol from the point of
view of the safeguards against any nuclear materials and related activities being
used for military purposes, the Russian Federation regards the participation of a
State in this document as one of the necessary requirements for the transfer of
sensitive nuclear technologies and equipment.

According to the 2012 Safeguards Implementation Report, the IAEA was
conducting inspections of over 800 facilities or other locations. Over 1000
inspections had been carried out. The total cost of the application of the safeguards,
both budgetary and extrabudgetary, amounted to over 130 million euro. Taking
into account the forecast for the future of the development of peacehl nuclear
energy and various practical uses of nuclear materials, we find the work of the
IAEA Secretariat aimed at increasing the technological and financial efficiency of
safeguards very important. We believe that the system of the IAEA safeguards
must be based on the latest technological achievements, be technically reliable,
unbiased and transparent for the Member States. Thus, we are of the view that we
must first of all implement the approach of the so called 'integrated safeguards' for
the States who have an Additional Protocol to comprehensive safeguards
agreements in force and concerning which the Agency has decided that there are no
undeclared nuclear materials and activities.
We are aware of the fact that the Secretariat of the Agency not only works
actively on increasing the technological effectiveness and economic efficiency of
the IAEA safeguards system and its improvement, but also takes certain practical
steps in this direction. We believe that this work should be conducted in a
transparent manner and in close cooperation with the IAEA Member States. The
legitimacy of the system of safeguards should come fiom its non-political,
unbiased nature, consideration of solely objective and, primarily technical factors
while assessing the States' nuclear programs.
We hope that the report, which has been requested by the IAEA General
Conference, regarding the concept on the application of safeguards on the national
level being elaborated by the Secretariat of the Agency will be ready in time and
will clear up the role of specific technical goals and factors in the planning of the
application of safeguards for States in general, its execution and assessment.
Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
The Russian Federation actively cooperates with the Agency on
strengthening the safeguards system by providing financial and technical support

through the implementation of the national program of scientific and technical
support of safeguards. In over 30 years of its existence, a lot has been done in order
to strengthen the technical foundation of the work of the IAEA Department of
Safeguards, to equip it with new methods of measuring, new material and source
specimens, and to train its staff.
In the framework of this program the Russian Federation provides support to
the IAEA in examining in Russian laboratories environment specimens collected

by the Agency during inspections; new technologies of detecting undeclared
nuclear materials and activities are being developed. Particular attention is paid to
the training of the IAEA inspectors and this does not only concern traditional
spheres of the implementation of non-destructive methods of control of nuclear
materials but also inspections at the facilities used for isotopic enrichment of
uranium. The training of the IAEA Secretariat and the IAEA Member States staff
on the accounting and control of nuclear materials on the basis of Russian
specialized institutions continues.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
When considering the operation of the NPT, Russia attaches great
importance to the implementation of provisions of paragraph 2, Article 111 of the
Treaty. In this context we positively assess the work of the NSG and Zangger
Committee that have proven in practice the possibility of establishing the
coordinated control over nuclear exports on a non-discriminative basis and
feasibility of drawing-up lists of controlled nuclear materials, equipment and
technologies as well as principles of their transfer to non-nuclear countries. We
would consider it important for the other countries to build up, as Russia does,
their national export controls based on the rules of export and control lists, as well
as goods listed therein pursuant to the principles of the GNS and Zangger
Committee.
We believe it is useful to further enhance the universality of achievements of
the GNS and Zangger Committee as well as their control lists while carrying out
nuclear exports or implementing the projects related to peaceful nuclear

cooperation. At the same time it is necessary to continue working with other
countries, including non-NPT members in order to engage them into the efforts
aimed at strengthening the export control regimes.
In this context Russia also stands for consistent implementation by all the
countries of the provisions of the UN SC Resolution 1540 that are aimed at
counteracting the WMD "black" markets, preventing the diversion of such
weapons and their associated materials, technologies and means of their delivery to
non-State actors, and primarily, terrorist organizations. We actively participate in
the work of the UN SC Committee established with the view of effective
implementation of provisions of the UN SC Resolution 1540.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
Speaking about the efficiency of the NPT and enhancement of nuclear nonproliferation regime in general, one cannot forget about relevant measures taken by
the world community and aimed at improving safety of nuclear materials and
facilities. In this context, we attach great importance to enhancing the universality
of international legal instruments in the field of nuclear safety and security and
counteraction to nuclear terrorism, i.e. the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, Convention on Physical Protection of
Nuclear Terrorism and its Amendments.
We believe that the IAEA should take the central role in the cooperation in
the field of physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities. We take note of
the issuance by the Agency of the latest edition of the Recommendations on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Rev.S). We
support the IAEA efforts aimed at developing relevant guidelines. Russian experts
take an active part in this work.
Russia also provides corresponding assistance to the IAEA Member States
that have started or are planning to start using nuclear energy for peacehl
purposes. The IAEA training courses on nuclear safety and security take place
regularly at the Obninsk Interdepartmental Special Training Centre in Russia.

Since 2001, over 500 foreign experts have been trained in the area of accounting,
control and physical protection of nuclear materials.
The joint work with the U.S. and IAEA on the return fiom the third countries
of new and spent highly-enriched uranium fuel (HEU-fuel) fiom research reactors
of Russian and American design to the country of origin is considered by us as an
important direction of multilateral cooperation. All in all, about 2,000 kg of nuclear
fuel

- that would be enough to produce about 80 nuclear munitions - have been

returned to the Russian Federation under the program. The implementation of this
program makes a substantive contribution to strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime.
It should be noted that in the beginning of April due to the joint efforts of
Russia, the U.S. and Czech Republic in cooperation with the IAEA the highlyenriched radiated nuclear fuel fiom the research reactor of the Institute of Nuclear
Research was withdrawn to the town of Rzhvesk, Russia. During the last decade
six shipments of HEU totaling to over 180kg of HEU - that is enough to produce
about 7 nuclear explosive devices

- have been successfUlly transported Erom the

Czech Republic to the Russian Federation. As a result, all HEU was taken back
from the territory of the Czech Republic.
Russia assists the Agency's program aimed at gradual reduction in the
enrichment of nuclear fuel on research reactors to the level below 20%. Over the
previous years the program achieved certain results, and many reactors have been
converted from highly-enriched (HEU-fuel) to low-enriched (LEU-hel) uranium
fixel.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
All regional non-proliferation challenges may and should be addressed only
by political methods and in accordance with the NPT provisions.
In this context it is necessary to achieve the earliest non-nuclear status of the
Korean Peninsula, resumption of the 111-fledged membership of the DPRK in the

NPT as well as application of the IAEA safeguards in its territory. We stand for the
continuous diplomatic efforts aimed at looking up for mutually acceptable

outcomes and ways of moving forward towards settlement of the nuclear problem
on the Korean Peninsula by means of the earliest resumption of the six-party talks.
We emphasize once again that there is no other reasonable alternative to a
politico-diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue based on the principles
of mutual respect, reciprocity and a step-by-step approach.
We support the continuation and intensification of the negotiation process
between the E3+3 group of international mediators and Iran to normalize the
situation with the Iranian nuclear profile. The purpose of these negotiations is to
restore confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear program that
will lead to withdrawing the above profile fkom the UN SecuAty Council and

IAEA Board of Governors agenda, lifting of all sanctions and ensuring the 1 1 1
implementation of Iran's rights under the NPT, including its right to enrichment
after all Iranian nuclear activities are set under reliable and comprehensive control
of the IAEA.

We believe that while accelerating the dynamics of the ongoing negotiation
process it would be absolutely untimely and counterproductive to increase any
further political and sanction pressure on Iran. Such steps create an unfavorable
background for the diplomatic process that indeed has prospects. Any threats of
military actions are absolutely unacceptable.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,

We remain convinced that only a systematic approach to the issues of
nuclear non-proliferation and enhancement of the NPT in general will allow to
hlfi11 the task of preventing the emergence of new nuclear weapon countries on
the planet. In this context, the role of the IAEA as a unique international
organization that ensures the necessary balance between the promotion of peaceful

use of nuclear energy and the compliance with nuclear weapon non-proliferation
regime becomes even more crucial.
Thank you, distinguished Mr. Chairman.

