Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the International Organizations
in Vienna

Постоянное Представительство
Российской Федерации
при международных организациях в Вене

Unofficial translation
Check against delivery

STATEMENT
by Ambassador Mikhail I.Ulyanov
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation

at the First Session
of the Preparatory Committee
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Cluster II. Non-proliferation and IAEA safeguards)

Vienna, May 8, 2017

2
Mr. Chairman,
We consider prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation a primary objective
for the States Parties to the NPT; only through achieving it, a more secure and
stable world could be ensured.
One fundamental achievement on this track is the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Actions (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme. Today, Iran is the most
verified country by the IAEA. The Agency has been rapid enough in arranging
quite a sophisticated verification mechanism and is now effectively fulfilling its
tasks that allow controlling all the aspects of the JCPOA implementation and
safeguards application in Iran. We thank the IAEA and the personnel of the
Secretariat for their professional work. On our part, we provide multifaceted
support to the Agency on the Iranian issue, in particular, by organizing special
training courses for inspectors on uranium enrichment and stable isotope
production.
In his reports, the IAEA Director General regularly confirms Iran’s
fulfillment of its JCPOA obligations. The country also implements the Additional
Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement. We hope that such a large scope of
verification measures will facilitate Iran’s early receipt of the so called broader
conclusion confirming the absence of undeclared nuclear material or activities.
There is no place here for politicizing or artificial dragging the process.
The JCPOA is by all means a unique arrangement. In particular, it envisages
a unique verification mechanism and additional confidence building measures. It is
for a good reason that the UN Security Council Resolution 2231 adopted in support
of the Plan of Action contains a separate operative paragraph stipulating that
measures defined in the JCPOA could not be considered as a precedent. We
encourage all Parties to strictly adhere to this provision and refrain from any
attempts to extend JCPOA verification mechanisms to other countries.
Nevertheless, certain Iranian experience might be helpful and applicable in
the context of the most relevant and volatile threat to the non-proliferation regime,

3
which is the nuclear issue of the Korean Peninsula. First and foremost, it is about
the possibility to deal with complex problems through creative diplomatic and
political solutions, and diligent talks. That is what lacks today on the Korean
Peninsula.
Russia rejects the DPRK’s self-proclaimed nuclear status. We openly declare
to Pyongyang our conviction that the policy of nuclear missile capacity building
will not contribute to the security of the country. On the contrary, it will have
devastating consequences for the DPRK and for the region as a whole. We
advocate Pyongyang’s strong commitment to the relevant UNSC decisions, cease
of all nuclear and missile tests and return to the NPT regime. It is important though
to prevent restrictions from narrowing the window of opportunities for the
negotiations, as well as from escalating the humanitarian situation in DPRK.
Still we are convinced that the reason of tensions on the peninsula lies not
only in Pyongyang’s nuclear and missile programmes but also in the increased
military activity of the United States and its allies in North-East Asia. It is evident
that Pyongyang will not abandon its nuclear weapons as long as it feels that its
security is directly threatened. And that is how it interprets regular maneuvers and
exercises carried out by US-centered military and political alliances in North-East
Asia, alongside the escalation of the US military presence, in particular,
deployment of THAAD anti-ballistic missile systems in South Korea.
The problems of the Korean Peninsula, including the nuclear issue, should be
dealt with through an integrated solution to the whole spectrum of issues arising
between the parties concerned so as to further create conducive environment for
denuclearization. This requires de-escalation of overall military and political
tensions, abandonment of further military infrastructure build-up, reduction of the
ongoing maneuvers, and establishment of a trust-based climate among the States of
the region.
Mr. Chairman.
The IAEA safeguards applied in accordance with paragraph 1 of the Article

4
III of the NPT are a key element of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The trust
of the NPT States Parties in the IAEA safeguards system is a key factor of the
sustainability of this regime. It has always been based on the objective character of
the IAEA verification mechanism, its technical credibility, independence from
political circumstances, as well as its resting upon safeguards agreements
concluded by States. To maintain the NPT, the IAEA safeguards system should
continue to be based on the above mentioned principles, including in occurrence of
any reform.
It is vital to avoid introduction of any subjective element in the IAEA
verification mechanism. The Policy-Making organs of the Agency – the General
Conference and the Board of Governors – should play a key role in political
decision-making related to the safeguards, including modifications to their
application and monitoring of the Secretariat activities. The Board of Governors
has also a vital role to play when making decisions related to Agency's response in
case of violations by States of their NPT obligations.
We have followed closely the situation around the reforming of the
safeguards system related to the introduction of the State-Level concept of applying
safeguards. Though the content of the reform has been modified to better reflect
views of the Agency’s Member States, the process is far from over and the reform
is far from perfect. We believe that the development of new approaches to
safeguards application should be open, whereas decisions on modifications to
IAEA safeguards application practice should build upon wide support from the
Member States of the Agency and be adopted by its Policy-Making organs. It is
important that the Secretariat regularly informs the Agency’s Policy-Making organs
on the ongoing and future steps in this regard. Particularly important is the
preparation of a comprehensive report on the implementation of State-specific
approaches to the application of safeguards in States that have comprehensive
safeguards agreements, additional protocols and broader conclusions confirming
that all their nuclear material is used for peaceful purposes.

5
Mr. Chairman,
In the context of implementing State-Level approaches to safeguards a
question of handling information on possible non-compliance with nonproliferation obligations received from external sources and not as a result of the
Agency verification activity becomes particularly sensitive. All information used by
the IAEA Secretariat in preparing safeguards conclusions should have an evidencebased character proving its accuracy and ensuring that this information may be
relied on during political discussions in the Policy-Making organs. The IAEA
Secretariat should be prepared, if necessary, to defend accuracy of such information
at meetings of the Board of Governors.
It is vital that, notwithstanding the reform, the IAEA verification activity
would still focus on those materials and facilities that could represent a real
proliferation threat. The genuine importance is not to be found in declared
intentions or the image presented in mass media. The genuine importance lies in the
country's potential. Policy may change quickly but potential or its absence is a
more stable thing.
Mr. Chairman,
We find it important to ensure a sustained strengthening of the IAEA
safeguards system through universalization of the Additional Protocol and the
Safeguards Agreement, which alongside the Agreement is meant to become a
globally recognized verification standard for the States' fulfillment of their nonproliferation obligations. Recognizing that signing the Additional Protocol with the
Agency remains purely voluntary for the NPT State Parties, we call upon the
countries that have not yet done so, to conclude as soon as possible the Additional
Protocol to Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements with the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
In the Russian Federation, more than 30 nuclear facilities are listed as those
to which the IAEA safeguards could be applied, in accordance with the Agreement
of 21 February 1985 between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the

6
Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
On July, 1 2010, the Agency chose the facility of the International Uranium
Enrichment Centre in Angarsk to start applying safeguards. The first full-fledged
Agency’s inspection on the site took place in 2010 and since then inspections have
been carried out regularly with the latest one taking place in November 2016.
The Russian Federation has been actively cooperating with the Agency to
enhance the safeguards system by providing financial and technical assistance
through implementation of a national scientific and technical safeguards support
programme. For over 30 years of the existence of this programme, significant work
has been done to strengthen the technical base of the IAEA’s Department of
Safeguards, and to provide it with new objective measurement methods, samples of
materials and sources, as well as trained personnel.
In particular, under this program, the Russian Federation provides the IAEA
with assistance in analyzing in Russian laboratories of environmental samples
collected by the Agency during its inspections. New technologies to detect
undeclared nuclear materials and activities are being developed. We place great
emphasis on the training of the Agency’s inspectors. This training goes beyond
traditional application of non-destructive methods of nuclear materials control. We
train IAEA inspectors to conduct verification at isotopic enrichment plants. We also
continue training the personnel of the Agency’s Secretariat and expects from IAEA
Member States on nuclear material accountancy and control in Russian specialized
institutions.
Mr. Chairman,
This year marks the 20th anniversary since the opening for signature of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). 183 States have already signed
the Treaty and 166 have ratified it. The importance of CTBT’s early entry into force
has been confirmed at various fora in Vienna and New York dedicated to the
anniversary of the Treaty. For the first time in history, the UN Security Council

7
adopted a resolution (resolution 2310) in support of the Treaty. A separate statement
was arranged upon by the P5 on the CTBT. Russia ratified the CTBT
17 years ago and has consistently been committed to the Treaty. In his statement on
April 11, 2016, President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin underlined our
willingness to promote its early entry in force.
Nevertheless, despite international efforts, the CTBT has not entered into
force yet. Total lack of positive developments in the position of eight States whose
ratification is required for its entry into force, is a matter of deep concern. We
should avoid the situation that such an important Treaty could risk a doom. We
encourage the remaining eight States, among which the United States has special
responsibility, to do their utmost to accede to the CTBT without further delay. It is
in your hands to finally make this vital Treaty fully operational.
Let me also draw your attention that in the context of vague prospects for the
Treaty’s entry into force, it is necessary to carefully and prudently consider any
initiative aimed to qualitatively change the situation around the Treaty. Moratoria,
though important, cannot substitute for the legally binding obligations under the
CTBT. Besides, we believe that any further lack of progress in the Treaty’s entry
into force calls into question the need for the accelerated development of the
Treaty’s verification mechanism.
Mr. Chairman,
In the context of implementation of Article III of the NPT, Russia attaches
great importance to the work of international export control regimes, namely the
Zangger Committee (ZC) and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). These regimes
have proven in practice that it is feasible to effectively counter nuclear proliferation
risks on a nondiscriminatory basis and without prejudice to the international
cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Russian national export control
system is based inter alia on the ZC and the NSG guidelines and control lists. We
have consistently stated that participation in the NSG of all States - major suppliers
of nuclear and dual-use goods that are controlled by the Group, including those

8
States that are not Parties to the NPT, provided that they pledge to comply with the
NSG Guidelines and to promote non-proliferation, will strengthen nuclear export
control regime.
Mr. Chairman,
Russia is engaged in the negotiations regarding a fissile material cut-off
treaty (FMCT). In particular, our expert has become a member of the FMCT High
Level Expert Preparatory Group, which will hold its first meeting this summer.
However, let me note that the adoption of such an agreement is well overdue. A
FMCT could have become an extremely valuable agreement in the late 1960s –
early 1970s. In the course of time, its ‘added value’ has significantly dropped with
four nuclear powers introducing a voluntary moratorium on the production of
fissile materials, while non-nuclear States acceded to the NPT, which de facto
already prohibits for them the production of fissile materials. We do not consider
the conclusion of this treaty as a priority for the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
However, we stand ready to participate in negotiations understanding that they will
take place at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva within its balanced
programme of work and in accordance with the Shannon Mandate (contained in the
document CD/1299).
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

