STATEMENT BY THE SINGAPORE DELEGATION ON CLUSTER 2:
NON-PROLIFERATION, SAFEGUARDS, AND NUCLEAR WEAPONFREE ZONES, AT THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY
COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020 NPT REVIEW CONFERENCE, GENEVA,
23 APRIL – 4 MAY 2018
Mr Chairman,
1
Singapore supports the IAEA’s critical role in safeguards
verification. The Agency’s safeguards verification regime is essential for
building confidence among states and promoting non-proliferation. We call on
all States Parties which have not done so to conclude Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and the Additional Protocol with the IAEA as soon as possible.
2
Singapore fully supports the IAEA’s verification and monitoring
work in Iran under UNSC Resolution 2231 (2015). The IAEA’s continued work
is key to the success of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in
verifying that Iran has been implementing its nuclear-related commitments. We
also welcome the Agency’s efforts to enhance its readiness to resume safeguards
verification in the DPRK, including through the formation of a DPRK Team
within the Department of Safeguards in August 2017.
Mr Chairman,
3
The proliferation of nuclear technology, materials, and dual-use
items for illicit purposes is of great concern in today’s highly-connected and
complex world. While Singapore faces unique challenges as a major
transhipment hub, we take our counter-proliferation obligations seriously and
implement the relevant UNSC Resolutions (UNSCRs) fully. We have a robust
export control regime that is regularly updated to be in line with the four main
multilateral export control regimes, namely the Australia Group (AG), the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), and
Wassenaar Arrangement (WA). Singapore also actively participates in
multilateral and regional non-proliferation initiatives, including the ASEAN
Regional Forum on Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, the Proliferation
Security Initiative (PSI), and other senior-level talks on non-proliferation in Asia.
However, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. We therefore urge all
parties to play their part and institute effective export controls.
1

Mr Chairman,
4
Singapore also supports international conventions to prevent the
spread of nuclear technology for non-peaceful purposes and nuclear terrorism.
Last year, Singapore ratified the International Convention on the Suppression of
Acts against Nuclear Terrorism (ICSANT). Singapore is also party to the
amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM).
These Conventions are complementary and serve to buttress the global nonproliferation regime. We support the universalisation of these Conventions, and
encourage states that have not already done so to become party to them.
Mr Chairman,
5
Singapore supports the establishment of Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zones, which are concrete contributions to global nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. We are party to the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWFZ) Treaty, which entered into force in 1997. We are committed to
keeping our Zone free of nuclear weapons, and look forward to the ratification of
the SEANWFZ Treaty Protocol by the Nuclear Weapon States without
reservations as soon as possible.
6
Finally, we reiterate our regret on the failure to convene the
Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and other Weapons of Mass Destruction, as mandated by the 2010 NPT Review
Conference. We urge the relevant parties to work together in good faith to break
this stalemate.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
.

.

.

.

.

2

