
Mr. Chairman, 
On behalf of the Slovak delegation I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this Committee and assure you of the support of the Slovak delegation in your responsible assignment. Slovakia aligns itself with the statement of the EU in this Committee, therefore I would like to dedicate my speech to few comments on national level. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Nuclear energy with nearly 50% share in the electricity production plays an irreplaceable role in the economy of the Slovak Republic. Slovakia belongs to the countries still in the process of developing its nuclear energy sector. There are currently six reactors in operation in our territory, one reactor under decommissioning, an interim spent fuel storage and a radioactive waste treatment facility. There is also a radioactive waste repository under commissioning. All spent fuel Mom the decommissioned reactor has been transported back to the Russian Federation according to an agreement from 1956. The spent fuel from the power plants in operation is stored at the site of the plants. Besides nuclear fuel, small quantities of nuclear material are used by about 70 authorized users, mostly in form of radiation protection containers made of depleted uranium. 
All nuclear facilities on the Slovak territory as well as all nuclear material are subject to IAEA safeguards in accordance with the relevant safeguards agreement. In addition the Nuclear Regulatory Authority of the Slovak Republic (UJD) performs inspections based on the national Atomic Act that entered into force on I July 1998. According to the Act the UJD is responsible for fulfilling the obligations of the Slovak Republic arising Mom international treaties, in particular Mom the NPT and the CTBT. 
The Atomic Act regulates the classification of nuclear material, the conditions for its production, processing, procurement, storage, transportation, use, accounting and control. Nuclear material may only be procured and used on the basis of a permit issued by the UJD. The UJD may impose penalty up to the amount of EURO 1.2 mil in case the nuclear material is acquired without license or used for any other purposes than peaceful. If a violence of the license conditions occurs, and the user of the nuclear material does not make required adjustments within the period stipulated by the UJD, the UJD may insist that the nuclear material be transferred to another licensee. 
As far as accounting is concerned, the owners of nuclear material are obliged to keep exact records on the amounts, imports, exports, storage sites, their consumption and transports in terms of the requirements of the UJD and the IAEA. The relevant information in this respect is provided to the IAEA. IAEA inspectors having a liase passé are not required to obtain visa to enter Slovakia and have free access to any nuclear facility on its territory. The inspectors appointed by the IAEA to visit Slovakia are accepted without any objections, and are enabled with conditions necessary for undisturbed and effective performance of their duties. The inspections are performed with an active participation of the UJD. 
Nuclear installations in Slovakia include five facilities - material balance areas (MBAs). These are four nuclear power plants including the decommissioned one and a spent fuel storage facility. One MBA is a LOF type. In 1999 nuclear material from the decommissioned power plant was completely removed but the IAEA surveillance still continues. According to facility attachments the IAEA annually performs physical inventory verification in each of the facilities. So far no MUF has been recognized. In particular, this is a result of an efficient national accounting and control system administrated by the UJD and of effective cooperation between all parties involved. 
In the framework of the strengthened IAEA safeguards system, during the 43rd IAEA General Conference in 1999, a new Agreement between the Slovak Republic and the IAEA for the Application of Safeguards in accordance with the NPT and the Protocol Additional to this Agreement were signed. The new Safeguards Agreement will replace the old one which has been in force since 1972. The main feature of the Agreement is that it reflects the new geopolitical situation after the constitution of the Slovak Republic. Simultaneously, the conditions for the implementation of the Additional Protocol are prepared in cooperation with relevant state authorities, including elaboration of analyses on necessary changes in the national legislation. 
As an instrument supporting non-proliferation of nuclear weapons the export/import control of nuclear related and dual-use material, equipment and technologies is being used. 
Basic principles for control of export/import of selected goods are defined in the Act No. 547/1990. The Act specifies the obligations of exporters/importers and also responsibility and authority of the licensing body - the Ministry of Economy. Detailed procedures on how to implement principles of the Act are listed in the Decree No. 50/1992. 
The role of the UJD in the export/import control mechanism is anchored in the Atomic Act. The Act gives the UJD the responsibility to grant permission for export/import of nuclear material, nuclear-related or dual-use material, equipment and technologies a list of which was issued in a subsequent Decree in 1999. The list is based on attachments to the IAEA INFCIRC/254/Part 1 and Part 2. In the process of considering the applications the UJD follows the recommendations and requirements of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), guidelines published in the IAEA INFCIRC/254 and the guidelines of the Zangger Committee published in the IAEA INFCIRC/209. The final decisions of the UJD in this respect are mandatory for the Ministry of Economy. 
Slovakia is actively participating in activities of the NSG working group for increasing transparency in the export/import control. As agreed in the Zangger Committee, Slovakia annually reports on export of source and special fissionable material or nuclear related material and equipment specified in the Committee's "Trigger List". 
Another contribution of Slovakia to the strengthened implementation of the safeguards system was the withdrawal of its reservations regarding the Sections 26 and 34 of Articles VII and X of the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the IAEA. The Slovak Republic thereby consider itself bound by these provisions. The communication in this respect was made to the Director General of the IAEA in May 1998. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Slovakia has actively contributed to the creation of the IAEA's Programme for Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguard System. Full support has been expressed to Agency's proposals concerning the Programme at meetings of the Board of Governors. 
Slovakia fully supports every measure aimed at strengthening the safeguards system in order to ensure the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear materials on universal and non-discriminatory basis and prevention of viola60p of the system. 
These measures should be supported by an effective system of physical protect on with the objective to prevent illicit trafficking in nuclear materials. Though, the illegal trafficking has so far involved only small quantities of nuclear material the measures to prevent such incidents remain inevitable. The IAEA initiated ac6vides for the revision of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. In our view, an extensive analysis for assessing the effectiveness of the assistance programs provided by the IAEA and Member States should be carried out. In this connection, the illicit trafficking database is a useful instrument in understanding the scale of the issue and for the elaboration of effective remedial measures. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation has a positive view on the ongoing implementation of Article III of the NPT and considers its advancement accompanied by the improvement of currently used procedures indispensable for decreasing further the risk of the nuclear weapons proliferation. 
I thank you. 
