STATEMENT BY
MRS. MELINDA WILLIAMS-MALUKA, COUNSELLOR
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, VIENNA

FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITIEE FOR THE
2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER 2 ISSUES

08 MAY 2017
VIENNA

Check against delivery

Chairperson,

My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement and would like to share some additional views in its national
capacity.
South Africa continues to hold the view that nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation are mutually reinforcing processes and both elements are essential for
attaining and maintaining a world free of nuclear weapons.

We are therefore

supportive of efforts aimed at promoting nuclear non-proliferation. However, we
stress that these efforts should not deny or impose conditionalities for access to
technology to countries, especially developing countries, under the guise of nonproliferation measures.

My delegation supports the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) efforts to
strengthen the safeguards system in all States with safeguards agreements in force
and within its legal mandate as this will contribute to mutual confidence in the
peaceful nature of a State's nuclear activities and the absence of undeclared nuclear
activities or material. It is our view that strengthened safeguards greatly facilitate the
transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the benefit of developing
countries.

Chairperson,

South Africa reiterates its conviction that the IAEA is the only internationally
recognized competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance
with safeguards agreements of States Parties, concluded in compliance with their
obligations as stipulated in Article "I of the Treaty. We join other States Parties in
sharing our commitment to provide the Agency with the necessary support and
assistance to fulfil its safeguards and verification mandate.

Whilst the Additional Protocol is a voluntary measure, my delegation recognizes its
importance as a confidence building measure, especially with regard to those States
with advanced nuclear programmes and facilities. It remains South Africa's view that

the Additional Protocol is an indispensable instrument which enables the IAEA to
build confidence and provide credible assurances regarding the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities.

Chairperson,

My delegation however expresses its disappointment that no progress has been
made to implement the specific actions agreed to at the 2010 NPT RevCon in the
development of appropriate legally-binding verification arrangements with the IAEA
to ensure the irreversible removal of fissile material designated by each nuclearweapon State as no longer required for military purposes. In addition, we further
regret that no progress has been made for additional declarations of stockpiles of
fissile material that could be used in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. My delegation also remains concerned about possible withdrawals by the
nuclear-weapon States of nuclear material from such selected facilities as provided
for in their respective agreements. It is incumbent on the nuclear weapon States to
refrain from such withdrawals, and to apply the principles of irreversibility, verifiability
and transparency in relation to their NPT obligations.
Chairperson,

We continue to work closely with the IAEA with regard to safeguards implementation
in my country. Having drawn the broader conclusions in South Africa for the first time
in 2010, confirming that there was no indication of diversion of declared nuclear
material from peaceful nuclear activities and no indication of undeclared nuclear
material or activities, the IAEA started implementing Integrated Safeguards approach
in July 2015. We are pleased that South Africa continues to maintain its broader
conclusion.
Considering the Significant costs of implementing safeguards globally, my delegation
has always held the view that the implementation of integrated safeguards was
intended to ensure savings through the reduction of inspections in the field and
which would in turn decrease the burden on the Member State given the decrease in
Agency staff inspections. We therefore look forward to receiving the Agency's report

about lessons learned and experience gained in State-level approaches for States
under integrated safeguards after State-Level approaches have been updated and
are being implemented for all such States, including a cost benefit analysis as
requested by Member States during the IAEA General Conference in 2016.

Chairperson,

South Africa has consistently articulated the view that nuclear security should be
located within the broad framework of nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
objectives and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy

We should all remain vigilant of the risks inherent in the continued existence of
nuclear weapons and high-risk, unsafeguarded material that fall outside international
oversight, as well as those posed by nuclear terrorism, the illicit nuclear network and
criminal acts aimed at using nuclear or other radioactive material for malicious acts.
South Africa therefore remains committed to maintaining effective nuclear security of
all nuclear material consistent with international obligations, and to cooperating with
other States to raise nuclear security levels internationally.

Chairperson,

South Africa supports the full implementation of the NPT, as well as its universal
application, in pursuit of the ultimate goal of achieving a world entirely free from
nuclear weapons.

We therefore believe that the international community must

redouble its efforts to achieve universal adherence to the NPT, strengthen the
multilateral institutions responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and
be vigilant against any steps that could undermine the determination of the international
community as a whole, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

I thank you, Chairperson.

