Thank you, Chairperson,
Please accept my congratulations on your election to preside over this Main Committee and the assurance of my delegation's support for your efforts to steer our work to a successful conclusion. I also wish to note that South Africa associates itself with the statement that was made by the Non-Aligned Movement.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is the only internationally recognized competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance with safeguards agreements of State Parties, concluded in compliance with their obligations under the NPT. In this regard, it has been the view of South Africa that the strengthened safeguards system remains an essential element of collective efforts to address the threat posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Such strengthened safeguards would contribute to establishing confidence in the peaceful application of nuclear energy, which would greatly facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy. In this regard, South Africa urges those Member States who still have to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency to do so as soon as possible.
South Africa is of the view that the Additional Protocol plays an indispensible role in providing an important tool to strengthen the Agency's verification system and providing credible assurance about the absence of undeclared nuclear material or activities. Whilst the Additional Protocol is a voluntary measure, South Africa recognizes its importance as a confidence building measure, especially with regard to those States with advanced nuclear programmes and facilities. In this regard, South Africa once again calls upon all States, and especially those with advanced nuclear programmes and facilities, to consider concluding an Additional Protocol with the Agency.
Chairperson,
South Africa has consistently reiterated its call upon the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to fully and verifiably terminate any nuclear weapons programme, to return to the NPT, sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to place all its nuclear facilities and materials under comprehensive IAEA safeguards.
South Africa has also closely followed developments regarding Iran's nuclear programme and welcomes the vital role played by the IAEA with regard to Iran's implementation of its Safeguards Agreement and the Agency's continuous verification of Iran's declared nuclear material. South Africa continues to urge Iran to cooperate fully with the Agency to clarify all outstanding issues and reiterates its call upon all parties concerned to redouble their efforts to seek constructive dialogue in order to achieve a sustainable solution, which will reduce tension and promote a spirit of cooperation. South Africa urges Iran to continue its full co-operation with the IAEA in order to provide the necessary clarification and to fully implement the Additional Protocol pending its ratification. Chairperson,
South Africa has been following with interest the ongoing debate about the various nuclear fuel aspects amidst the anticipated expansion in the use of nuclear energy for electricity production and wishes to underscore the need to involve the IAEA in any outcome of this discourse and that decisions should be reached on the basis of consensus
Although the prevailing proliferation concerns may prompt us to consider further modalities or alternative arrangements on supply mechanisms, these should not impose unwarranted restrictions and controls over the legitimate peaceful use of nuclear energy and the inalienable right of Member State to pursue any nuclear fuel cycle capabilities, consistent with their non- proliferation obligation under the NPT. Having access to a mechanism to ensure the reliable supply of nuclear fuel should therefore not involve pre-conditions that will require non-nuclear- weapon States in conformity with their legal obligations under the NPT to forgo aspects of their article IV rights related to the use of nuclear energy.
Chairperson,
South Africa would like to utilize this opportunity to re-emphasize the importance of nuclear weapon-free zones (NWFZs) in promoting regional stability, global nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. South Africa considers the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones as an integral part of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. In this context we welcome the entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty that establishes a nuclear- weapon-free zone in Africa.
The establishment of such zones plays a key role in freeing the world of nuclear weapons. Although the nuclear-weapon States have a special role to eliminate their nuclear arsenals, nuclear disarmament is the concern of all States, and in this regard, nuclear-weapon-free zones represent one of the important building blocks in achieving nuclear disarmament. This Conference should therefore agree on measures to implement, as a matter of urgency, the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. We should also support the creation of new and additional NWFZs in other parts of the world and urge all relevant States to sign and ratify the Protocols to the already existing NWFZs. In addition, an important precedent of a "nuclear-weapon-free State" already exists that could also be built upon by other States.
Regarding broader cooperation between Member States of different NWFZs, existing efforts to work together on issues of common concern should be commended and supported. Such initiatives provide a sound basis to further strengthen co-operation among all the signatories of the various nuclear-weapon-free zone Treaties with the aim to realize our common objective of a world free of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, Chairperson, at a time of renewed interest in nuclear energy and a rapid expansion of both nuclear power and non-power applications, the treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones could play a role in encouraging regional and sub-regional programmes for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.
Chairperson,
The existence of the illicit nuclear network poses one of the most serious challenges to the international community and to the NPT. Our shared commitment to the Treaty's non- proliferation provisions demands that we effectively and decisively take appropriate action against illicit nuclear networks. As one of the first successful cases against those involved in the so-called AQ Khan Network, through which certain countries were provided with nuclear technology through, among other, networks established in a large number of countries, the South African authorities closely co-operated with their counterparts in other countries, as well as with the IAEA. Our experience illustrated the value of the IAEA and of effective information- sharing that has allowed us to identify individuals or entities involved in such illicit activities with a view to prevent, combat and eradicate this illicit trade.
Chairperson,
South Africa supports the full implementation of all the provisions of the NPT, as well as its universal application, in pursuit of the goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear weapons. We therefore believe that the international community must redouble its efforts to achieve universal adherence to the NPT, strengthen the multilateral institutions responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and be vigilant against any steps that could undermine the determination of the international community as a whole, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, Chairperson,
Whilst the full implementation of all non-proliferation commitments are of great importance, the achievement of genuine security requires a similar commitment to the full implementation of all Treaty provisions under the other two equally important pillars of the Treaty. In particular, nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation remain inextricably linked and mutually reinforcing. Progress on both fronts is therefore required to attain the goal of a world free from the scourge of nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Chairperson.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



