
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Given that the NPT has served as the cornerstone of global nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, it is of the utmost importance to maintain the integrity and credibility of the Treaty. My delegation firmly believes that the NPT is an irreplaceable multilateral instrument for the maintenance and reinforcement of international peace and security, and that the global regime for nuclear non-proliferation should be further reinforced so that it can effectively cope with the heightened threat of nuclear proliferation.
In order to consolidate the non-proliferation regime, my delegation would like to address the challenges the non-proliferation community is facing.
First, my delegation attaches foremost importance to achieving the universality of the Treaty and its universal application. Although an absolute majority of the State Parties has continued to urge the states outside the NPT to join the Treaty, the task of universalization still remains as an unresolved issue for us. My delegation once again calls upon those states staying outside the NPT to join us as non-nuclear weapon states without further delay or preconditions. We also urge them to refrain from acts that are contrary to the core principles and purposes of the Treaty pending their accession to the Treaty.
Second, in order to ensure confidence in State parties' compliance with their Treaty obligations, it is indispensable to secure the universal application of the comprehensive safeguards agreement strengthened by its Additional Protocol. In order for the IAEA to be able to provide credible assurances not only about declared materials but also about the absence of undeclared materials and activities, it should be equipped with the Additional Protocol as well as a full-scope Safeguards Agreement.
However, regretfully enough, 30 NPT States parties have yet to conclude Safeguards Agreement as of 5 March 2008, and more than half of the NPT States Parties have yet to bring into force the Additional Protocol, hi this regard, my delegation urges those State Parties that have yet to conclude Safeguards Agreement or the Additional Protocol to do so without further delay.
Third, effective export controls play another important role in achieving the goal of
nuclear non-proliferation by controlling nuclear technologies and items with proliferation potential. My delegation appreciates the contribution made by the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) in this regard, and supports every effort of the NSG to strengthen its export control regime, including the "discussions of the Additional Protocol as a condition of supply." We also attach great importance to UN Security Council Resolution 1540, which is binding in nature for the UN Member States. According to the UN Security Council Resolution 1540, the Member States "shall take and enforce effective measures to establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation" of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery. In this regard, we welcome the unanimous adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1810 last week which extended the mandate of the 1540 Committee for three more years.
Fourth, the Republic of Korea, as a State Party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, fully supports the measures taken to prevent non-state actors from acquiring WMD and their means of delivery, including the ongoing efforts to strengthen the physical protection of nuclear materials. The issue, related to possible proliferation to non-state actors, seems to pose a greater threat than we ever anticipated. As the former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and three other prominent figures emphasized in the Wall Street Journal in January this year: "the accelerating spread of nuclear weapons, nuclear know-how and nuclear material has brought us to a nuclear tipping point and we face a very real possibility that the deadliest weapons ever invented could fall into dangerous hands". The full implementation of the international obligations including the aforementioned UN Security Council resolutions is critical to prevent this danger.
Fifth, I would like to emphasize the need to provide states with substantive incentives for strengthening international cooperation for nuclear non-proliferation. For instance, the G-8 Global Partnership has been playing an important role in prohibiting weapons and materials of mass destruction from proliferating to non-nuclear weapon states and non-state actors by providing economic and technical assistance to those states which chose the way of nuclear dismantlement. The Republic of Korea has been participating in the G-8 Global Partnership since 2005, including the projects in Russia and Ukraine.
Finally, Let me address pressing proliferation challenges to the NPT regime, the Iranian and North Korean nuclear issues. At the heart of the Iranian nuclear issue lies the confidence deficit. Having been found by the IAEA Board to be in non-compliance with
its safeguards obligations, the Iranian case was reported to the UN Security Council. The Security Council, in turn, has demanded several times in the relevant resolutions that Iran suspend all enrichment-related activities as a confidence-building measure. We support every effort towards the diplomatic and negotiated resolution of this issue. How to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue in a peaceful and negotiated manner remains a serious challenge for the international community.
With regard to the North Korean nuclear issue, the Republic of Korea has continued its efforts to achieve a comprehensive resolution of the North Korean nuclear issues, including nuclear weapons development and nonproliferation, within the framework of the Six-Party Talks in cooperation with concerned countries. As a result, the DPRK agreed to give up its nuclear program in the September 19 Joint Statement and also reaffirmed its commitments not to transfer nuclear materials, technology, or know-how in the October 3 Agreement on the Second-phase Actions.
The Republic of Korea shares the international community's concern regarding the reported North Korean nuclear cooperation with Syria. We truly believe that denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is the best way to resolve at root the problem of the current North Korean proliferation issue. The Republic of Korea will strive to clear up any suspicions regarding the North Korean nuclear issue and to achieve the ultimate goal of denuclearization by carrying out thorough verification and implementation of nuclear dismantlement through the Six-Party process.
Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Korea believes the challenges the NPT is facing are neither unique nor new. Every international regime can evolve by going through the process of coping with challenges. The proliferation challenges the NPT is facing can also be overcome with the common will of the states parties as a whole, and, if successful, it will ultimately contribute to strengthening the integrity and viability of the NPT.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.