SWEDEN

2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Main Committee II

Statement by
Mr. Pascal Restel
Representative
Sweden

New York, 7 May 2015

PERMANENT MISSION OF SWEDEN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE' NEW YORK, NY 100 17 • TEL (2 12) 583-2500 • FAX (212) 583-2549

Mr. Chairperson,
Let me begin by congratulating you for assuming the important task as the Chair of the Main
Committee II. Your able leadership will be valuable to our work. You have the Swedish
delegation's full support and cooperation.
Sweden assoc~ates itself with the statement made by the European Union. Our general
priorities for this committee are also reflected in the comprehensive working paper prepared
by the Vienna Group of 10.
In addition we would like to make the following national remarks.
Like many others, Sweden believes that the model Additional Protocol should be seen as an
integral part of the IAEA's safeguards system, and that it together with the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement represents the current verification standard pursuant to article III of the
Treaty. We also welcome the IAEA's efforts to apply the State-level Concept to all states with
a safeguards agreement in force, as part of the continuing evolution of safeguards
implementation.
Nuclear Security has been on the top of the agenda for the last few years. We are now
preparing for a last summit within the Nuclear Security Summit process. Strengthening global
nuclear security, however, requires continuous efforts and remains a common priority. IAEA
plays a central role in strengthening the nuclear security framework globally as well as in
coordinating international activities in the field of nuclear energy.
IAEA is also the depository of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
(CPPNM) and its 2005 Amendment. We urge all states that have not already done so to
become party to the amended Convention and to ratify and implement the amendment as soon
as possible.
Peer review mechanisms such as the IAEA IPPAS (International Physical Protection
Advisory Service) missions can contribute to further strengthening nuclear security as well as
building confidence. We believe there is scope to make further use of this tool. The IAEA
carried out an IPP AS mission in Sweden in 2011 and we will request a follow-up mission in
2016. We encourage others to invite missions with regular intervals, follow up the findings
and to share the results more generously.
Furthermore, it is important that all states in possession of nuclear weapons undertake
voluntary measures, in order to increase transparency and confidence in the effectiveness of
security for military nuclear materials.
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing. The role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in verifying non-proliferation obligations under the NPT
is crucial. In this context, we welcome the progress achieved in relation to Iran's nuclear
programme, and express support for the continued diplomatic efforts.

Nuclear-weapon-free zones contribute to peace and security. We welcome the fact that zones
have been established in Latin America and the Caribbean, the South Pacific, South East Asia,
Africa, Central Asia and Mongolia.
We are committed to the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East and commend the efforts by Ambassador Laajava of Finland to bring about the
agreed Conference.
There has not been any progress regarding the DPRK. Sweden has strongly condemned the
nuclear test explosions by the DPRK. We call upon the DPRK to return to the NPT and IAEA
safeguards without delay, and to sign and ratify the CTBT.
We are deeply concerned about the arms race in South Asia. We underline the importance of
universalizing the NPT and call upon States that have not yet done so to join the Treaty as
non-nuclear weapon states and, pending their accession, to adhere to its terms, and also call
on those States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT without further delay.

I thank you Mr. Chairperson.

