2017-05-08
Check against delivery
NPT PrepCom – Cluster II – Statement by Sweden
Mr. Chairman,
Sweden aligns itself with the statement by the European Union under this cluster.
Our general priorities are also reflected in the comprehensive working papers
prepared by the European Union and the Vienna Group of Ten.
I would like to make the following remarks from a national perspective.
Mr. Chairman,
Sweden, is deeply concerned by the DPRK’s persistence in accelerating its nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes, thus defying the international
community. Tensions in North East Asia are rising and the potential for mistakes,
misunderstandings and miscalculations is high. International peace and security are
at risk. We call on the DPRK to take immediate steps towards a complete,
verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes.
Mr. Chairman,
Sweden believes in strong verification regimes that can build trust, increase
confidence and transparency. The role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in verifying non-proliferation obligations under article III of the NPT is crucial for
the credibility of the Treaty. Together we have to make sure that the IAEA is given
adequate resources and independence to continue carrying out this essential task.
This year we are celebrating two birthdays. Sweden is proud to have been
contributing to the IAEA safeguards support programme for 30 years – with
equipment as well as training.
We also celebrate 20 years of the Model Additional Protocol. It is an indispensable
tool for IAEA safeguards, and together with the comprehensive safeguards
agreement has become the current verification standard pursuant to article III of
the Treaty. We call on all States, who have not already done so, to conclude and
ratify the Additional Protocol.

As part of the JCPOA, Iran provisionally applies the Additional Protocol. We
believe that an early ratification by Iran would be a welcome step to create
sustainability and enhance confidence. The full implementation of the JCPOA is
essential, as the avoidance of actions undermining mutual trust.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear Security and nuclear terrorism has for many years been high on the
political agenda. It remains a global challenge. Sweden continues to be an active
member of the Global Partnership. We cooperate with several eastern European
countries to assist in upgrading nuclear security and prevent nuclear terrorism. We
also support the IAEA’s work on nuclear security as well as its coordinating role.
Since 2010 we have supported the IAEA’s trust fund with more than half a million
euro.
All nuclear material and radioactive materials need to be protected. This includes
military material. We call on all states that possess nuclear weapons to increase
transparency and confidence in the effective security of such materials.
The multilateral export control regimes constitute an indispensable part of the
global non-proliferation work in support of the NPT. Ensuring their continued
effectiveness, including by updating the regimes in light of new and emerging
technologies, is crucial.
Mr. Chairman,
Sweden remains committed to the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East. We regret that it was not
possible to convene the Helsinki conference as foreseen by the outcome document
from the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In order to agree on the arrangements for
a meaningful conference, the only sustainable way forward is through dialogue and
confidence building among all the stakeholders.
Thank you!

