*****
(Unofficial translation)
Mr Chairman,
The issue of nuclear non-proliferation raises crucial questions for international peace and stability.
Although the NPT has delivered clear results in terms of non-proliferation over the past 40 years, no
satisfactory response has been given to serious concerns raised in recent years. Switzerland regrets
this, and calls on the States concerned to fully comply with their obligations. Furthermore, Switzerland
is convinced that only a diplomatic approach to the proliferation cases will lead to a long-term
acceptable solution for all sides.
Mr Chairman,
Twenty-three actions on non-proliferation were adopted at the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
Significant efforts are now required to implement them.
One of the major issues discussed in 2010 was the implementation of the IAEA Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreements. The discussions also covered the need for a greater acceptability of
instruments, such as the Additional Protocol, which provide for more effective safeguards. Indeed,
despite the undeniable benefits of this instrument in preventing proliferation, a State Party to the NPT
is – at this stage – not under the obligation to conclude an Additional Protocol.
As noted last week by the IAEA, a further 17 States Parties have adopted an Additional Protocol since
2010. This is encouraging. Nevertheless, we believe that some developments could contribute to more
progress in the universalization of the Additional Protocol.


First of all, it is not always easy for a State to identify the benefits that can be derived from
implementing more stringent safeguards instruments. As a matter of fact, these instruments lead
to an increased burden in procedural terms, while the increased transparency they provide should
rather reduce this. Switzerland has therefore started a process on examining how the IAEA
safeguards system could be optimized. The initial results of this process have been presented in a
study with recommendations. Switzerland will continue to examine this issue with the IAEA and
interested States Parties. To this end, we have tabled a working paper.

3



Secondly, more substantial progress on nuclear disarmament could help make the Additional
Protocol more acceptable. For as long as more progress on disarmament has not been achieved,
it will be unrealistic to expect that non-nuclear-weapon States – which have respected their
commitment to non-proliferation – will accept, as a whole, that the Additional Protocol be made
mandatory in the same way as the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements. However, a lack of
progress on disarmament cannot justify failures to comply with non-proliferation obligations.



Thirdly, nuclear co-operation between some States Parties to the NPT and non-States Parties
does not help to improve the acceptability of more stringent safeguards instruments. In fact, such
a selective nuclear co-operation gives the impression that more can be gained by remaining
outside the regime than by joining it. This also undermines efforts to achieve the universalization
of the NPT, as called for by the 2010 Action Plan. The impact of such a co-operation on the NPT
regime – and the possible limits thereof – need to be further examined.

Mr Chairman,
A further dimension that was addressed during the non-proliferation discussions in 2010 is that of
nuclear security, which is the subject of several actions of the Action Plan. Significant efforts are still
needed if these actions are to be carried out, particularly those relating to the universalization and full
implementation of the legally-binding multilateral instruments. This is primarily the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment which, although adopted in 2005, has still
not entered into force.
Moreover, maintaining and deploying nuclear weapons, as well as the existence of stockpiles of military
fissile materials, pose a serious threat in terms of nuclear terrorism. It is Switzerland’s view that, if we
genuinely wish to improve global nuclear security, it will also be necessary to deal with these “sources”
that can lead to possible acts of nuclear terrorism.
At the recent Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, Switzerland - like several other States and the UN
Secretary-General - highlighted this link between disarmament and nuclear security, as well as the
necessity to include this aspect in the work of future nuclear security summits.
Thank you for your attention.

4

