
Mr. Chairman,
The issue of nuclear non-proliferation raises crucial questions for international peace and stability. Nearly all
States Parties have been in full compliance with their non-proliferation obligations. The NPT has therefore
obtained substantive results in the area of non-proliferation over the past forty years. Nevertheless, various
cases continue to pose challenges to the non-proliferation regime. Quite clearly, the acquisition of nuclear
weapons by new States would make our world less safe. This is why the fight against nuclear proliferation
remains one of Switzerland's foreign policy priorities.
Mr Chairman,
The growing tensions caused by proliferation issues underscore the importance of both a robust and
universal non-proliferation regime. Switzerland calls on Iran to respect its international obligations and to
cooperate fully with the IAEA in order to reassure the international community about the peaceful nature of
its nuclear programme. In addition, Switzerland also urges the DPRK to return to the NPT's non-proliferation
regime. My delegation underlines that a satisfactory and sustainable solution can only be achieved through
negotiations.
During the 2010 NPT Review Conference, 23 non-proliferation measures were adopted. The full
implementation of these measures is essential for maintaining a credible non-proliferation regime.
Switzerland has taken note of the work carried out by three independent organizations that analysed the
extent to which the 2010 Action Plan was implemented. What emerges from this analysis is that - in contrast
to the disarmament pillar - real progress has been made in the implementation of non-proliferation
measures. Nevertheless, substantial non-proliferation progress still needs to be made so we can get fully
positive results at the 2015 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
Switzerland supports the establisnment of a robust non-proliferation regime. We think that to achieve this,
the following steps should be at the center of our efforts.
1.

First, we must focus our efforts on the universalisation of the non-proliferation instruments whose
adoption is required by Article III of the NPT, namely the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreements.

2.

Second, we must support efforts to universalise complementary instruments which, like the Additional
Protocol, have proved invaluable in strengthening the non-proliferation regime. In that connection, we
also mention the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment. Switzerland encourages the States that
have not yet done so to adopt these instruments in view of the 2015 Review Conference.

3.

Third, we need to support the IAEA's ongoing efforts to maximise the effectiveness of the safeguards
system resulting from the adoption of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and an Additional
Protocol. As far as Switzerland is concerned, the combination of the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and an Additional Protocol ought to become the standard for safeguards. The IAEA is
currently working on its safeguards system to make it less mechanistic and to take into account the
particularities of each country, without losing its effectiveness. In other words, the IAEA has to focus its
efforts as efficiently as possible where they are really needed. Switzerland has launched various
initiatives to support the IAEA in its efforts to optimise the safeguards system. During this 2"" session of
the Preparatory Committee, Switzerland has introduced a working paper on the results of a seminar on
strengthening cooperation between the IAEA and national authorities in charge of safeguards.
Switzerland encourages Siates Parties to support the IAEA's conceptual work.

4.

Fourth, we must support efforts to establish new instruments to combat nuclear proliferation. Here,
Switzerland is naturally thinking of the pending negotiations on a Treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. The negotiation of such a treaty is all
the more important because it would combine nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament efforts and
would therefore have positive effects on these two pillars of the NPT.

3

5.

Fifth , this brings me to the inextricable link between nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. The two
are sides of the same coin. Switzerland is convinced that greater efforts in the field of non-proliferation
will be absolutely crucial in accelerating more significant disarmamenl progress. At the same time, we
believe that more substantial progress on disarmament could help making the combination of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and an Additional Protocol the standard for safeguards.

Mr. Chairman,
I would like to conclude with some remarks on nuclear security, which is also addressed by measures in the
2010 Action Plan. Switzerland believes that the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would result
from any act of nuclear terrorism fully justify more efforts in this field.
My country is of the opinion that States have the primary responsibility in terms of nuclear security. However,
nuclear security is a global challenge. Therefore, my country is also of the view that there is a need to
cultivate a responsibility on a regional and global level. Thus, Switzerland is currently contributing, through
special support within the framework of the OSCE , to the implementation of nuclear security measures
contained in Security Council Resolution 1540. My country is also actively engaged in the process of nuclear
security summits , and welcomes the resu"s obtained at this stage.
Lastly, we welcome the decision by the IAEA Director General to convene a ministerial conference on
nuclear security next July. Switzerland believes that a more global approach will ensure a more inclusive
treatment of this issue, be it as regards the adoption of various multilateral instruments, the inclusion of
military fissile materials in the debate, or by broadening the scope of the debate to include new threats such
as cyber risks.
Thank you for your attention.

4

