Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA
48 COTTAGEGASSE 1180 VIENNA
TEL (431) 478 3335 • FAX (431) 478 2907

Statement by
Mrs. Suphanvasa Chotikajan Tang,
Director of Peace, Security, and Disarmament Division,
Department of International Organizations,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand

at Cluster 2: Non-proliferation,
the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

8 May 2017, Vienna

Mr. Chair,
1. At the outset, Thailand would like to align itself with the statement delivered
by the distinguished delegate of Indonesia on behalf of NAM.
Mr. Chair,
2. The NPT has achieved progress in ensuring the peaceful uses of nuclear
technology by all State Parties. However, it has yet to be effective enough in
convincing all States that our common interest lies in limiting further
proliferation and achieving complete nuclear disarmament as required by
Article 6.
3. Non-proliferation must go hand in hand with disarmament. This is why we
continue to call on Nuclear Weapon States to fulfil their obligation under
Article 6 of the Treaty. As long as some States maintain their nuclear
weapons, others may be compelled to seek them for their own security.
4. Regardless of the justifications made for nuclear weapons, their continued
existence may enhance the perception of increasing security of a few but is
truly harmful to the collective security of all. In our view, nuclear nonproliferation is a global issue requiring the community of States to work
towards creating and maintaining a much-needed atmosphere of mutual trust,
conducive to promoting concerted actions against proliferation. As part of a
region where proliferation exists, regional security concerns must be
effectively and peacefully addressed to ensure security of and for all.
5. In this regard, Thailand reiterates its unwavering support to the universal
adherence of the NPT and encourages constructive engagements with States
that remain outside the Treaty, particularly nuclear-armed States. We
support the strict and full implementation of the JCPOA by all parties
concerned as well as the IAEA's role in monitoring and verification in Iran.
We also support the efforts contributing toward the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other WMDs. Furthermore,
we call for the DPRK to cease its nuclear weapons programme, return to the
NPT and the IAEA’s safeguards at an early date, and stress the importance of
dialogue and peaceful means in resolving this issue.
6. Thailand also maintains the view that all security arrangements must be
strictly consistent with the NPT. Any deviations from this global norm must
be discouraged.

Mr. Chair,
7. The complexity of our integrated world and a changing security landscape
increase the risk that nuclear weapons may fall into the hands of non-State
actors. As a regional hub of transport and centre of a vibrant region,
Thailand recognizes this challenge. This is why we attach great importance to
the effective implementation of relevant international obligations including
those contained in UNSC resolution 1540.
8. In addition to being a party to all major international treaties, Thailand is also
a partner in several non-proliferation efforts such as the Nuclear Security
Contact Group, the Proliferation Security Initiative, and the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. We value their complementarity and further
promote their synergies in order to support the effective implementation of
the NPT and other important non-proliferation treaties.
Mr. Chair,
9. To further strengthen the NPT and its implementation, future progress must
be built upon the agreed outcomes of the past RevCons. My delegation
emphasizes the significance of enhanced transparency and effectiveness of
State Parties in carrying out their respective obligations. We encourage an
improved reporting mechanism and support the IAEA’s crucial role in
safeguards and verification.
10. On our part, Thailand has strengthened its national legislation to strengthen
the implementation of its non-proliferation obligations. The new Nuclear
Energy for Peace Act has entered into force since 1 February 2017. The Act
focuses not only on nuclear safeguards but also on nuclear safety and
security. And with this Act, Thailand will soon be able to ratify the Additional
Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, the International
Convention on Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The Counter-Terrorism and
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Financing Act has also taken
its full effect. The draft Trade Controls on WMD-related Items Act which
will regulate the export of dual-use items in accordance with national and
international legal regimes is expected to take effect in early 2018.
11. Work is also in progress on Thailand becoming a party to remaining
international agreements such as the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material and its 2005 Amendment, among others.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.

---------------

