
Thailand associates itself with the statement on Cluster II as delivered on 2 May 2008 by the distinguished representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We believe that compliance with the provisions of the NPT relating to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards and nuclear-weapon-free-zones is a crucial step in promoting the sanctity of the Treaty.
In this context, my delegation wishes to highlight the role of the IAEA as the sole international and technical authority in the field of safeguards and verification. Thailand congratulates the IAEA on its 50th anniversary in 2007 and will continue to support its important work. But as we charter our future course, there can be no room for complacency. This is why my delegation stresses the importance of strengthening the Agency's capability so as to enable it to respond to various proliferation challenges.
The conclusion of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and the Additional Protocol (AP) lies at the core of the IAEA safeguards system. These instruments are important to verifying the non-diversion of nuclear material and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities. Thailand urges all States that have not yet done so to bring the CSA into force as soon as possible. The AP also plays a catalytic role in building international confidence in the peaceful nature and transparency of any nuclear programme. We therefore believe that the universalization of the AP will go a long way towards enhancing the effectiveness of the IAEA safeguards system. On our part, Thailand signed the AP in September 2005 and is now in the process of undertaking comprehensive internal procedures with a view to facilitating its entry into force in due course.
In complementing the international obligations under the NPT, the importance of Security Council resolution 1540 should also be underscored. Thailand has taken the necessary steps to implement this resolution, such as by amending our regulations on import and export control of nuclear and radioactive material as well as dual-use technologies. Thailand supports the IAEA's activities in the field of nuclear security and the use of low enriched uranium in civilian nuclear reactors. We have already accepted the Code of Conduct for the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources and are now working on our domestic legal requirements for ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones in all regions of the world constitutes an indispensable building block towards a world free of nuclear weapons. As the depository state of the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone, or SEANWFZ, Thailand fully supports the Plan of Action to Strengthen the Implementation of the Treaty as endorsed by the SEANWFZ Commission during its 10lh anniversary in July last year. The Plan of Action underscores the importance of consultations between ASEAN and the nuclear weapon states on the signing of the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty. We appreciate and commend China's recent gesture to sign the Protocol and hope that this will further reinvigorate the consultation process.
Turning to specific regional issues, my delegation welcomes the progress of diplomatic efforts within the framework of the Six Party Talks. Thailand regards the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula as an essential element for a comprehensive and sustainable peace in the region and beyond. We urge all parties concerned to continue to work together with a view to fulfilling the commitments prescribed in the 2005 Joint Statement. Thailand stands ready to work closely with the international community to ensure the peaceful resolution of the issue, particularly as the incoming Chair of the ASEAN Regional Forum later this year.
Mr. Chairman,
Forging an effective non-proliferation and safeguards regime remains a daunting challenge. While this PrepCom provides an opportunity to address these pertinent issues, we must be practical in our approach with a view to bridging our differences in favor of the common good. For only through useful building blocks and brave efforts in creating momentum in our dialogue can we realistically hope to achieve our goals and ensure that such opportunity shall not be "missed."
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.