Statement by Turkey
IInd Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster II debate
(30 April 2018, Geneva)
Check against delivery
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey is resolutely committed to the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons and
to ensuring safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
These fundamental tenets of the Treaty firmly place it as an integral component of
international peace and security. As such, Turkey advocates the universalization and full
implementation of the Treaty. We, therefore, call upon all nuclear armed states outside the
NPT to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states.
Turkey acknowledges that, IAEA safeguards constitutes a fundamental component of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime. They promote greater confidence among the international
community by providing assurance that states are adhering to their safeguards agreements.
Such assurances contribute to the viability of the NPT’s global grand bargain.
IAEA safeguards also help create an environment conducive to nuclear cooperation.
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and its Additional Protocol are the essential
instruments establishing a solid verification standard. We call upon those states, which have
not done so, to sign, ratify and implement their CSAs and Additional Protocols without delay.
As an embarking country, which has been implementing the CSA since 1982 and which
brought its Additional Protocol with the IAEA into force in 2001, Turkey enjoys extensive
cooperation with the Agency. The Broader Conclusion obtained from the Agency in 2012,
confirming that all nuclear material in Turkey have remained in peaceful activities, proves
the high standards that Turkey’s system of accounting and control of nuclear material
adheres to.
Expanding use of nuclear technologies means more material and facilities for the Agency to
safeguard. The fact that, since 2010 the number of nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards
increased by 10 percent, and the amount of nuclear material verified increased by 20 percent,
shows the immensity of the task and the significance of the responsibility carried out by the
IAEA.
The safeguards system needs to be responsive to changes in the nuclear landscape. Turkey
supports the IAEA’s efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of its monitoring and
1

verification activities. In this regard, we welcome the development of the State Level
Approaches. We believe, by customized implementation of safeguards based on state-specific
factors, the Agency will better respond to complex demands.
The cessation of all nuclear weapon tests constitutes an important step towards not only
nuclear disarmament but also for non-proliferation. In this regard, I would like to stress the
centrality of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). All States should uphold and
maintain the moratoria on nuclear weapon test explosions and any other nuclear explosions.
Despite all the progress achieved at the political and technical levels, we regret the fact that
twenty years after its opening for signature, the CTBT has yet to enter into force.
We once again call upon all States, in particular the remaining Annex II States whose
ratifications are required for the entry into force of the Treaty, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey notes the dialogue between the Republic of Korea and the DPRK, and expects the
Summit between the two parties, yields positive results. Turkey firmly adds its voice to those
urging the DPRK to abandon its nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles programme in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We also urge the DPRK to comply with its
international obligations in full, to return to the NPT at an early date and IAEA Safeguards,
and to ratify CTBT.
The agreement on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a significant diplomatic
achievement for peace and stability not only for the region but also on a global scale. It
testifies the continued relevance not only of the NPT, but also of the practice of solving
disagreements through diplomatic means. It is noteworthy that all reports of the International
Atomic Energy Agency confirm Iran’s compliance. The Plan has been successful and it
should be preserved. We are concerned about the ongoing uncertainty regarding the future of
the JCPoA.
A pending critical commitment of the 1995 Review Conference is the convening of an
International Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the
Middle East. This commitment will continue to be an essential element of this review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey, together with its partners at the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI), will continue to play a constructive role in bridging positions during the 2020 NPT
Review Cycle. The NPDI has submitted for consideration at this PrepCom, several working
papers including one on safeguards.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the NPT’s opening to signature. Along these years,
despite many challenges, the Treaty has made progress. It has found ground for compromise
in order to advance our shared goal of a more secure world. This should continue to be our
basis.
Thank you.
2

