
Mr. Chairman,
In our previous statements, we highlighted the mutually reinforcing nature of non-proliferation and disarmament, and we underlined that they require continuous and irreversible progress. Today, we would like to explain our position on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards and nuclear weapon free zones (NWFZ).
Success of non-proliferation regimes does not depend solely on the adoption of treaties. Their universalisation and the compliance with their provisions are also essential.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been serving competently the implementation of the NPT. International safeguards system of the IAEA is the fundamental tool in non-proliferation efforts. Turkey strongly supports the strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system. The Agency's capability and its legal authority need to be reinforced to deter undeclared nuclear material and activities. We believe that the comprehensive safeguards agreement and the additional protocol represent the current verification standard.
We are pleased to note that the number of States adhering to the IAEA Additional Protocol (AP) is now 86. Nevertheless, we need universal implementation of the AP in order to make sure that peaceful nuclear programmes do not run the risk of diversion into weapons programmes. We therefore, call on all states that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and implement the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement, as well as the IAEA AP as early as possible.
No doubt, this issue is closely linked to the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty. Our views on the peaceful use of nuclear energy will be presented under Cluster III.
As regards the non-proliferation, we need to remain vigilant on the risk of nuclear terrorism, as well as illicit trade in sensitive nuclear equipment and technology. Utmost attention should be paid to combating terrorism and preventing terrorists from obtaining access to nuclear material and other components of WMD that would threaten peace and security. In this context, we call for adherence to and effective implementation of two important international conventions, namely "the Convention on Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism" and the "Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material".
The UNSC Resolution 1540 which addresses these risks is an important tool in our efforts to tackle WMD proliferation by non-state actors. We urge States to remain committed to implementing UNSCR 1540. Turkey will also continue to support the Proliferation Security Initiative.
We believe that coordinated implementation of export controls contributes to the non-proliferation objectives of the NPT. Upholding the core principles of the Treaty and development of and cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear energy are equally important.
Against this background, we would like to emphasize the works of the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers' Group with appreciation, Turkey will continue to contribute to these mechanisms with a view to establishing and sustaining transparency in nuclear related exports.
Finally, Turkey deems important the establishment of WMD-free zones wherever feasible. Turkey supports the establishment of an effectively verifiable zone, free of WMDs and their means of delivery in the Middle East and encourages all efforts for developing a common regional understanding on this project, with the participation of all parties concerned.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.