Clzeck against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION
OPTHE REPUULIC OFTURI<EY
TO THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
AT GENEVA

I

MISSION I'ERMANENTE
DE LA REPUBLIQUE DETURQUIE
AUPRES DE L'OPIIICE DES NATIONS UNlES
A GENEVE

Statement by The Delegation of the Republic of Turkey
NPT 11. Prep Com (Cluster I1 )
Mr. Chairman,

I

1

Before I begin my national statement, let me state that Turltey aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the distinguished representative of Mexico on behalf of the Nonproliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
It is important to recall that the 201 0 Action Plan calls on parties "to ensure that the IAEA
continues to have all political, technical and financial support so that it is able to effectively
meet its saleguards responsabilities under NPT's Article 3." Indeed, it is Turkey's strong
conviction that there is an indispensable need for our robust non-proliferation regime and
effective implementation thereof. The Agency is at the very core of the non-prolileration
system and needs to be upheld and strengthened. All States Parties have a common interest
in ensuring that the IAEA can effectively carry out its safeguards ilnplementation and
verification mandate. The IAEA safeguards system provides a practical means for Non
Nuclear Weapon States to have access to nuclear energy and technologies for exclusively
peaceful purposes. Therefore it is sale to suggest that it underpins the general international
sccurity envirotunent.
Recalling Actions 28 and 29 of the Actioil Plan, Turltey is pleased to see that more
countries now have the IAEA's Additional Protocol in force. Turkey remains convinced
that it is in the interest of every country to conclude the necessary safeguards arrangements.
Therefore, we call on all States to strive to apply this safeguards standard as a condition for
their supply of nuclear material, equipment and tehnology.
Equally, as per Action 30, we support the widest possible application of IAEA safeguards
to peaceful riuclcar facilities in the NWSs to ensure irreversible and verifiable removal of
the nuclear material.

Mr. Chairman,

Chcck against &livery

Export control plays a critical role in meeting the nuclear non-proliferation obligations.
Bearing in mind the complexity of illicit procurement activities and the duty of preventing
the acquisition by unauthorized actors, including terrorists, it is incumbent upon all of us to
aim to strengthen export control systems. Effective national controls over the export of
nuclear materials and technology as well as eflicient international cooperation and
solidarity are legitimate and necessary for the implementation of States' obligations.
At this stage, we wish to stress the importance of the full implemention of the United
Nations Security Council Resolution 1540, through the worlc of the 1540 Committee.
Mr. Chairman,
Turlcey's views on Nuclear Weapons Free Zones are very well known to this august body
and they were mentioned in our general statement earlier this week. For the sake of brevity
we will not go into depth on this issue. In fact, it is the intention of this delegation to
deliver a detailed statement on the issue of the Middle East Conference in the days to come.
Nevertheless, allow me, at this stage, to highlight the fact that Turltey's contentment
following the 2010 Review Conference turned into utter disappointment with the
announcement on the postponement of the Conference. We hope to see a breakthrough, at
the earliest convenience, on the discussions towards the preparation of the groundwork for
this Conference. Turlcey believes that a possible protraction of the existing stalemate will
inevitably have negative repercussions on this PrepCom and the NPT Review Cycle alike.
To this end, Turlcey urges all States to lend their support to the Facilitator and his team.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

