Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY TURKEY

at
the Ist Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster II debate
(8 May 2017, Vienna)

0

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
Turkey is resolutely committed to the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons and
to ensuring safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Few treaties have done as much to advance this cause as the NPT. It is the only legally
binding multilateral commitment to nuclear disarmament, a bulwark against the further
spread of nuclear weapons and the foundation upon which the non-proliferation regime
stands.
These fundamental tenets of the Treaty firmly place it as an integral component of
international peace and security. As such, Turkey advocates the universalization and full
implementation of the Treaty. We, therefore, call upon all nuclear armed states outside the
NPT to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey acknowledges that, the International Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) activities are
indispensible to the NPT regime and in ensuring that nuclear energy remains a source of hope
and prosperity for humanity and not a tool for destruction.
The IAEA safeguards system, through which the Agency provides credible assurances that
states are honouring their international obligations under the NPT, is part and parcel of the
global non-proliferation regime. Such assurances contribute to the viability of the NPT’s
global grand bargain.
The success of the NPT system depends on safeguards for timely detection of diversion. In
this regard, IAEA monitoring and verification is vital for helping to provide the international
community with confidence that nuclear material is not diverted from peaceful uses to
nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons-related activities.
To this end, Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and its Additional Protocol are the
essential instruments establishing a solid verification standard. Turkey is pleased to observe
that, the number of states with the IAEA’s Additional Protocol in force continued to increase
since 2015, reaching 129, with 17 more pending ratification. We call upon those states which
have not done so, to sign, ratify and implement their CSAs and Additional Protocols without
delay.
As an embarking country, which has been implementing the CSA since 1982 and which
brought its Additional Protocol with the IAEA into force in 2001, Turkey enjoys extensive
cooperation with the Agency. The Broader Conclusion obtained from the Agency in 2012,
confirming that all nuclear material in Turkey have remained in peaceful activities, proves the
high standards that Turkey’s system of accounting and control of nuclear material adheres to.
Widening use of nuclear technologies intrinsically means more material and facilities for the
Agency to safeguard. All States Parties to the NPT have a shared stake in ensuring that the
IAEA can effectively carry out its safeguards implementation and verification mandate.

1

Check against delivery
Turkey is of the view that, not only must its Member States provide the IAEA with guidance,
but they must also ensure that the Agency has the resources it requires to fulfil its evergrowing and crucial responsibilities.
The cessation of all nuclear weapon tests constitutes an important step towards not only
nuclear disarmament but also for non-proliferation. In this regard, I would like to stress the
centrality of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). We call upon all States to uphold
and maintain the moratoria on nuclear weapon test explosions and any other nuclear
explosions. Despite all the progress achieved at the political and technical levels, we regret
the fact that twenty years after its opening for signature, the CTBT has yet to enter into force.
(We once again encourage all States, in particular to the remaining Annex II States whose
ratifications are required for the entry into force of the Treaty, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible.)
Mr. Chairman,
Today, the greatest and most imminent challenge to the NPT regime and international peace
and security comes from the DPRK. The nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the
DPRK and its blatant disregard of its obligations under relevant UN Security Council
Resolutions and IAEA General Conference resolutions are sources of grave concern.
Turkey condemns in the strongest terms, DPRK’s repeated infractions of these obligations by
conducting nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches. Turkey further condemns DPRK’s
threat to use these weapons of mass destruction. Turkey firmly adds its voice to those urging
DPRK to abandon its contentious policies and return to the Six Party Talks and calls on the
DPRK to re-join the NPT and the IAEA safeguards at an early date and abandon its nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
The agreement on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is an important achievement for
peace and stability not only for the region but also globally. It testifies to the continued
relevance of the NPT. Full and transparent implementation of the JCPOA will strengthen the
non-proliferation regime. Turkey acknowledges and supports the key role of the IAEA in the
implementation of the JCPOA and believes that this role proves the importance of the
Agency with regard to global security.
As an important disarmament and non-proliferation measure, Turkey supports the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones wherever feasible and on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among states of the regions concerned. The failure to convene
an international conference on the establishment of a WMD-free zone in the Middle East has
been disappointing.
Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the establishment of a zone free of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East. This commitment will
continue to be a critical element of this review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
The threat of nuclear terrorism has emerged as a challenge that must be seriously taken into
account in our non-proliferation efforts. The risk of acquisition of weapons of mass
2

Check against delivery
destruction (WMD) and their delivery means by terrorists and other non-state actors should
not be underestimated. We need to remain vigilant and cooperate to avoid possible attacks
involving nuclear and radiological materials. UN Security Council Resolution 1540,
complemented by resolution 2325, remains a key part of the non-proliferation architecture.
While the responsibility for nuclear security lies with the state, nuclear threats and
consequences of nuclear terrorism transcend international borders. This is why, Turkey has
shown strong commitment to the enhancement of nuclear security, both at home as a national
responsibility and also in joining in international efforts for effective nuclear security
worldwide.
In this context, Turkey has been involved in the Nuclear Security Summit (NSS) process and
participates in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GINCT). Also, Turkey
presented its instrument of ratification of the CPPNM Amendment to the IAEA in 2015.
Finally, I would like to underline the critical role export control plays in meeting nuclear nonproliferation obligations. It is crucial for export control regimes to establish equal footing,
especially in the way they relate to countries outside the NPT regime.
Bearing in mind the complexity of illicit procurement activities and the duty of preventing the
acquisition by unauthorized actors, including terrorists, it is incumbent on all states to aim to
strengthen their export control legislation and practices as already stipulated by UNSCR
1540.
Thank you.

3

