Check Against Delivery
Statement by United Arab Emirates
NPT Review Conference - May 2015 - Cluster 2- General Issues
Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad Al Kaabi,
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the IAEA
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to congratulate you on your appointment as the chairman for this
committee. I assure you my delegation’s full support and cooperation.

The Non-proliferation pillar of the treaty, and in particular the IAEA safeguards
system has been challenged in the past and continue, in some cases, to fail to
provide the required assurance on the exclusive peaceful nature of nuclear
activities in some states.
States developing nuclear energy for peaceful uses should fully adhere to
comprehensive safeguards obligations; fully cooperate with the IAEA; and take
required steps to fully address all international concerns and obligations
including those of relevant IAEA and UNSC resolutions.
The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement is designed to provide a credible
assurance of the peaceful nature of all declared activities. However without
bringing into force an Additional Protocol, the issue of possible undeclared
activities is not addressed. Therefore it is essential to enhance the assertions
provided by the Safeguards Agreement through utilizing the tools supplied by
the Additional Protocol.
We welcome the increase in number of states that have brought into force an
AP , a substantive progress since 2010 NPT RevCon. My delegation urges all
states that have not yet concluded an AP with the IAEA to do so as soon as
possible.

Mr. Chairman,
Given the importance of non-proliferation pillar to the objective of the treaty, it
is imperative that the NPT review conference addresses non-proliferation
challenges, including non-compliance issues.
It is concerning that the IAEA , After years of efforts, has not been able to
report substantive progress in addressing outstanding issues in relation to
Iran’s nuclear programme , including those related to the possible military
dimension .
The international community has stressed that it is essential for Iran and the
IAEA to intensify their dialogue aiming at the urgent resolution of all
outstanding issues concerning its nuclear program and to exclude the existence
of a possible military dimension. This was affirmed by multiple resolutions of
the IAEA Board of Governors and UN Security Council, which called on Iran to
take the required steps by providing access without delay to all sites,
equipment, personnel and documents requested by the Agency.
My delegation continues to support diplomacy and dialogue to address Iran’s
nuclear issues ,
we hope ongoing diplomatic process will contribute to
reaching a comprehensive agreement to address all outstanding issues
including those referred to as possible military dimension issues.
Concrete results are needed to build confidence in the exclusive peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.

Mr. Chairman ,
My delegation thanks Ambassador Jaakko Laajava for his report on the
preparation for conference on the establishment of a nuclear weapons free
zone in the Middle East as called to by the 2010 NPT RevCon outcome
document . His efforts , commitment and dedication to this endeavor is highly
appreciated.

Mr. Chairman,
The UN General Assembly, for years has annually adopted resolutions calling
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. A good
number of Security Council and IAEA resolutions over decades have called for
progress on this issue…., an issue that is long over due.
UAE has welcomed and contributed to all efforts supporting the facilitator
work aiming at convening the conference on the establishment of ME zone
free of nuclear weapons and other WMD , including through constructive
engagement and participation at all consultation meetings . Therefore it is
regrettable that the conference did not take place as scheduled in 2012 despite
all these efforts.
My delegation continues to support convening a conference as outlined in
2010 at an early date . Convening such conference would be a good
opportunity to start a process that could lead to the establishment of a nuclear
weapons and other WMD free zone in the middle east .
In light of the failure to convene the conference in 2012, the convening process
needs to be strengthened to avoid further postponement. My delegation
emphasizes the value of consultations, dialogue, and preparatory work as an
essential element for a successful convening of such conference with
participation of all states of the region. These consultations and preparatory
work must follow a clear mandate and timeline and should support the
objective of convening the conference.
The way forward requires practical steps, and further efforts and assurances
from the depository states who have special responsibility as co-sponsors of
the 1995 resolution on the Middle East.
My delegation will work constructively though this conference to achieve a
positive outcome that supports the vision of establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and other WMD

Thank you Mr. Chairman

