Check Against Delivery
Statement by United Arab Emirates
NPT PrepCom

- April 2013 -

Cluster 2- General Issues

Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad Al Kaabi,
Permanent Representative o f the UAE t o the IAEA
Mr. Chairman,
The Non-proliferation pillar o f the treaty, and in particular the IAEA safeguards
system has been challenged frequently in the past and continue, in some cases,
t o fail t o provide the required assurance on the exclusive peaceful nature of
nuclear activities in some states.
There is no question that States developing nuclear energy for peaceful uses
should fully adhere t o comprehensive safeguards obligations; fully cooperate
with the IAEA; and take required steps t o fully address all international
concerns and obligations including those of relevant IAEA and UNSC
resolutions.
The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement is designed t o provide a a credible
assurance of the peaceful nature of all declared activities. However without
bringing in force an Additional Protocol, the issue of possible undeclared
activities is not addressed. Therefore it is essential t o enhance the assertions
provided by the Safeguards Agreement through utilizing the tools supplied by
the Additional Protocol.
Implementing an Additional Protocol as an integral part o f the safeguards
system, will provide the confidence in the exclusive peaceful nature of national
nuclear activities both declared and undeclared and will facilitate the full
support and confidence of the international community. We welcome the
increase in number o f states that have implemented an AP, reaching 119
states , a substantive progress since 2010 NPT RevCon. However there are
still a number of states that have not signed or brought into force an AP. We
urge all states that have not yet concluded an AP with the IAEA to do so as
soon as possible.

Mr. Chairman,
It is regrettable that the IAEA , After years of efforts, has not been able t o
report any substantive progress on addressing outstanding issues including
those related t o the possible military dimension of lran's nuclear programme.

The international community has stressed that it is essential for lran and the
Agency to intensify their dialogue aiming at the urgent resolution of all
outstanding issues concerning its nuclear program and t o exclude the existence
o f a possible military dimension. This was affirmed by multiple resolutions of
the IAEA Board of Governors and UN Security Council, which called on lran t o
take the required steps by providing access without delay to all sites,
equipment, personnel and documents requested by the Agency.

The lack of substantive progress, and the absence of any agreement on an
approach t o address all outstanding issues is a matter o f a serious concern, and
constitute a great challenge t o the NPT non-proliferation pillar in general and
SG system in particular.
Concrete results are needed t o build confidence in the exclusive peaceful
nature of lran's nuclear programme. We are concerned that the lack of
progress can have an adverse effect. An efFect that instead of building mutual
confidence and trust can raise uncertainty and elevate concerns.
We therefore continue t o call on lran t o fully address the Agency's serious
concerns regarding the possible military dimension, and t o engage with the
Agency substantively on all outstanding issues. We encourage lran t o spare no
effort in building confidence in Its nuclear activities, and t o work closely with
the IAEA t o achieve such objective.
We further encourage all parties involved l o seek a solution within the context
of international law, diplomacy and dialogue. We regard this as the only way
for a long-term solution t o lran's nuclear issue. The UAE further encourages all
Member States t o contribute positively t o that effect.
Mr. Chairman,
Given the importance of non-proliferation pillar t o the objective o f the treaty, it
is imperative that the NPT review process addresses such challenges, including
non-compliance issues. States should fulfill their international obligations and
fully address the international concerns. Safeguards system credibility must be
maintained and strengthened in line with the o f NPT objectives.

