UNITED KINGDOM

First Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review Conference of
the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: Vienna, 30
April - 11 May 2012.
Cluster 11 - Non-Proliferation
Statement
BY

Ambassador Jo Adamson
UK Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament

Head of the United Kingdom Delegation

at the

2012 Preparatory Co~nmitteefor the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

Vienna, 7 May 2012

Check against delivery

UNITED KINGDOM
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR JO ADAMSON TO THE FIRST PREPARATORY
COMMITTEE FOR THE NINTH REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIOFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS: VIENNA, 30 APRIL 11 MAY 2012
CWSTER I1 - NON-PROLIFEMTION
Mr Chairman,
1. The United Kingdom aligns itself with the statement just made by the distinguished
representative of the European External Action Service on behalf of the European
Union. In order to keep to time, I will highlight just a few key non-proliferation issues
of particular importance to the UK.
2. The United Kingdom continues to support UNSCR 1540 and stands ready to assist
states in its implementation.

3. The United Kingdom is committed to strengthening and supporting the International
Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards system, as the foundation of an effective nonproliferation regime. We welcome the accepted understanding that the IAEA's
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol represent the
verification standard, as underscored in the NPT action plan agreed at the 2010
Review Conference. We stand ready to support states wishing to sign and implement
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and/or Additional Protocols, and welcome
the adoption of safeguards agreements by a significant number of states since the NPT
Review Conference, contributing to movement towards universal adherence.
4. The United Kingdom continues to support the right of every state party to withdraw
from the NPT, but urges states parties to consider the ramifications of a withdrawal on
individual and collective security, including cases in which a state has breached its
Treaty obligations, yet continues after withdrawal, to benefit from technology
acquired while an NPT state party. In this respect, we reaffirm the need to address
urgently, cases of non-compliance with the NPT. The UK supports the central role of
the IAEA in verifying compliance.
Mr Chairman,
5. As called on in UNSCR 1887, the United Kingdom continues to urge the non-NPT
states to ratify the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states. In pursuit of this aim, we are
working to bring these states closer to the international non-proliferation mainstream.

6. Along with others, the UK continues to have strong concerns about the proliferation
implications of Iran's nuclear programme. The UK is fully committed to a peaceful,
negotiated solution to the nuclear issue and welcomes the most recent round of E3+3
talks on 14 April as first step towards this objective. We now need agreement on
Check agai~zstdelivery

2

urgent, practical steps to build confidence around the world that Iran will implement
its international obligations and does not intend to build a nuclear weapon.
7. We are deeply concerned about DPRK's failed satellite launch on 13 April, which is a
clear violation of UK Security Council resolution 1874. We urge the DPRK to
suspend all missile and nuclear-related activity and to commit to re-engaging with the
international community, including by returning to the Six Party Talks.
Mr Chairman,
8. The United Kingdom supports the principle of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, which
contribute significantly to bolstering the non-proliferation regime and enhancing
regional and international security - underlined by our record on the Treaties of
Pelindaba, Raratonga and Tlateloco. The agreement between the P5 and Association
of South East Asian Nations in November 201 1, on language for the P5 Protocol to
the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone, will grant treaty-based negative
security assurances to a further 10 states. We look forward to formally signing the
Protocol later this year. We remain committed to resolving outstanding issues to
enable UK signature of the Protocol to the Central Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone.
9. The UK reiterates its support for a Middle East free of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
As co-convenor of the conference on the Middle East Weapons of Mass Destruction
Free Zone, we welcome the efforts of the facilitator Jaakko Laajava. In support of Mr
Laajava's work the UK has provided funding towards his outreach programme, and
organised events in the margins of the Chemical Weapons Convention Conference of
State Parties and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention Review Conference
to bring together Mr Laajava, countries of the region, and others with an interest. We
will continue to support Mr Laajava in any way we can, but a WMDFZ cannot be
imposed from outside, and the success of the conference will require the engagement
and determination of all the states of the region.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Check against delivery

