STATEMENT
by the Delegation of Ukraine at the First Session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Non-proliferation, Safeguards, Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (cluster 2)
Mr.Chairman,
We recognize the threat posed to international peace and security by proliferation of
nuclear weapons and the need for strict compliance by all states with their non-proliferation
obligations.
It is our strong conviction, that the Treaty is vital in preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and in providing security benefits. We believe that this session of the
Preparatory Committee should reaffirm the fundamental importance of full compliance with all
provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and recognize that non-compliance undermines the
integrity of the Treaty and violates the trust parties place in it for their security.
Ukraine recognizes that IAEA safeguards are a fundamental element of the nuclear nonproliferation regime and play an indispensable role in the implementation of the Treaty thereby
strengthening states collective security and promoting further confidence among states, and
contribute to sustaining an environment conducive to achieving nuclear disarmament and
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this context we would like to emphasize
the importance of acceptance of a comprehensive safeguards agreement with an additional
protocol so that IAEA can provide credible assurance regarding the non-diversion of declared
nuclear material and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities. Ukraine supports
the IAEA's efforts to strengthen its verification system and to resolve issues associated with
states' safeguards implementation.
W; also recognize the additional protocol as an integral part of the IAEA safeguards
system and reaffirm that a comprehensive safeguards agreement together with an additional
protocol represents the verification standard that best fulfils the objectives of Article I11 of the
Treaty, and urge all NPT states parties which have not yet done so to conclude and to bring into
force an additional protocol as soon as possible. Strengthening measures provided for under both
comprehensive safeguards agreement and the additional protocol are now used routinely by the
IAEA, and thus significantly increase the ability of the Agency to verify the peaceful use of all
nuclear material in all non-nuclear-weapon states.
We would like to inform the delegations that in 2010 the IAEA issued for Ukraine
"broader conclusion" regarding implementation of our Safeguards Agreement and Additional
Protocol. This conclusion which Ukraine has received for the first time opened the way for
application by the IAEA of integrated safeguards for our country, which actually started in May
2012. Integrated safeguards approach represents the highest level of trust and cooperation
achieved between our country and the IAEA. On national level we also made a substantial
progress in upgrading our accounting and control mechanisms for nuclear materials. All our
actions are the proof of Ukraine's consistent policy in the area of nuclear non-proliferation.
Mr.Chairman,
The establishment of the internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on the
basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the states of the region concerned enhances global
and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes
towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament. We recognize the continuing
contributions that the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, Pelindaba and Semipalatinsk

are making towards the achievement of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament objectives,
and towards keeping the areas covered by those treaties free of nuclear weapons and their means
of delivery.
Ukraine welcomes the entry into force in 2009 of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty and the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. Inauguration of the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE) is another important step in implementation
of the Pelindaba Treaty. We also welcome the decision of the United States to go ahead with the
provision of legally binding security assurances to the countries belonging to the nuclearweapon-free zones established in Africa and the South Pacific. We call on other nuclear-weaponstates to follow this track.
Ukraine underlines the importance of the establishment of zones free of all weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery, where they do not exist, especially in regions of
tension, such as in the Middle East. Therefore, we call upon all parties concerned to consider
seriously taking the practical and urgent steps required for full implementation of the 1995 NPT
Review Conference decision regarding the establishment of an effectively verifiable nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East. In this regard the important milestone in
discussing the lessons learned froin the process of establishment and functioning of the existing
nuclear-weapon free zones was an international Forum on Experience of Possible Relevance to
the Creation of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle East, which took place on 21-22
November 201 1 at the IAEA's Headquarters in Vienna. The Forum for the first time provided a
unique platform for experience and information sharing among all interested parties including
states from the Middle East region. It was a positive experience in our view and we are looking
forward to successful conduct in 2012 under the Finnish chairmanship of the international
conference on this issues agreed by the 201 0 NPT Review Conference.
Thank you, Mr.Chairman.

