STATEMENT by the Head of the delegation of Ukraine at the First session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (cluster 2)
Mr Chairman,
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union
and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity.

Ukraine highly values the important role which the IAEA plays in
coordinating international efforts in securing nuclear non-proliferation regime and
facilitating the peaceful use of nuclear energy worldwide.
It is our strong conviction that the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
together with Additional Protocols represent the verification standard that best
fulfils the objectives of the Article III of the NPT.
Ukraine fully supports the IAEA activities in the area of nuclear non
proliferation. In 1995 Ukraine signed an Agreement with the IAEA for the
Application of Safeguards in Connection with the NPT; in 2000 Ukraine signed
Additional Protocol thereto. As a responsible and reliable partner Ukraine takes all
necessary measures at the national level to implement the 1AEA safeguards in
close cooperation with the Agency.
We support the IAEA efforts aimed at strengthening the effectiveness and
improving the efficiency of its safeguards system. We welcome the progress
made in the area of development of safeguards implementation at the State level
which will enable the Agency to address new demands and challenges related to
the nuclear technologies. In this vein we commend the high level of confidence
between Ukraine and the Agency reflected in downsizing, since the application of
the integrated safeguards in Ukraine in 2012, the verification activity in Ukraine.
Bearing in mind that current approaches are an essential part of international
confidence-building efforts. Ukraine finds it vital to continue further improvement
and optimization of safeguards regime in order to effectively respond to growing
verification requirements of Member States in this regard.
1h
16

of January of 201 7 marked the first anniversary of the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, agreed between China, Germany,
France, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States, the European Union as
coordinator and Iran. We reiterate our strong support of this milestone nuclear deal
and believe that its further implementation will significantly contribute to
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime.
While Iran has been proving its intention to the international community to
use nuclear technologies exclusively for peaceful purposes, we, however, share the
concerns over its recent ballistic missiles test launches. Should such ballistic
missile be capable of delivering nuclear weapons this test will be a clear violation
of UN SC resolution 2231. This situation requires thorough and detailed analysis.

While supporting the right of any state to take measures for protection of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, we call upon Iran to comply fully with its
obligations under the Comprehensive Plan and resolution 2231.
Mr Chairman,

The international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation process is still
confronted with serious challenges.
The nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the DPRK and conduct of
nuclear tests by this state in 2006, 2009, 2013, 2014 and 2016 present a serious
threat to the international non-proliferation regimes and international peace,
security and stability.
Pyongyang’s actions are a grave violation of the UN Security Council’s
resolutions and may lead to further significant aggravation of the situation on the
Korean peninsula. Moreover, it is a serious threat to the international peace and
security. Such acts prove the urgent necessity of entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and its universalization.

Ukraine repeatedly called upon the DPRK to abandon all its existing nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, renew its dialogue with the IAEA and re-engage
constructively with the international community by taking meaningful steps
towards denuclearization in order to work together towards lasting peace and
security on a nuclear-free Korean peninsula.
Ukraine as a country will use all possible leverages in its capacity of a
non-permanent member of the Security Council this year in order to return North
Korea to the international legal framework.
Mr Chairman,

Ukraine underscores the crucial role of export controls in implementing the
nuclear non-proliferation obligations under paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT.
We encourage all states to establish, develop and maintain appropriate effective
national export controls for nuclear and related dual-use goods and technology. We
stand ready to share our national practice in the area of export control with other
states.
In this regard Ukraine highly appreciates the results achieved by the Nuclear
Suppliers Group as well as Zangger Committee.
Recognizing the serious threat of nuclear terrorism, we reaffirm our
commitment to work together with the international community to strengthen
nuclear security.
Ukraine attaches great importance to the worldwide implementation and
continuous improvement of the highest standards of nuclear security, especially
taking into account that the nuclear-energy programme of my country stays one of
the largest in Europe and includes 15 operational power units at 4 sites of
Ukrainian NPPs.

Ukraine is taking all necessary measures to ensure the highest level of
physical protection of nuclear facilities and material, fully performs its
international obligations in the area of nuclear safety and security, and
comprehensively participates in the implementation of the activities envisaged by
the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan,
The necessity to immediately strengthen and adapt the regime of physical
protection of nuclear facilities and material in Ukraine is primarily related to the
threats emanating from ongoing aggression of Russia.
Over the past three years Ukraine significantly improved and strengthened
the national regime of physical protection of its facilities and material by
developing and introducing at all Ukrainian NPPs comprehensive plans of action in
case of sabotage and crisis situation. We implemented projects for modernization
of physical protection systems of nuclear and waste management facilities which,
inter alia, were incorporated in the Integrated Nuclear Security Support Plan of
Ukraine for 2016-2018.
We observe the recognised premise that the main responsibility for nuclear
security rests with each individual state. All states have the responsibility to
establish appropriate systems and take necessary measures to prevent, detect and
respond to the unauthorized access to nuclear and other radioactive material.
However, the fulfilment of these commitments in good faith could be
heavily undermined by the irresponsible behaviour of another state as we in fact
learned from our own experience.
Mr Chairman,

Despite dramatic circumstances Ukraine remains firmly attached to its
disarmament and non-proliferation choice. However, it must not be acceptable that
historic decision of Ukraine to abandon nuclear weapon capabilities resulted in
significant enhancement of security for all but Ukraine.
Russia’s illegal occupation and attempted annexation of part of Ukraine’s
territory
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
entailed militarization of the peninsula, including with nuclear capabilities. Such
Russia’s actions breach Ukraine’s non-nuclear status.
—

—

Mr Chairman,

We highly appreciate the IAEA principled position on safeguards
application to all nuclear facilities and material on the whole territory of
Ukraine, including the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, in accordance with the norms of international law, the IAEA Statute
and Safeguards Agreement and Additional protocol thereto between Ukraine and
the Agency.
Any possible attempts of Russia to extend its jurisdiction over nuclear
facilities and material of Ukraine located on the temporarily occupied territory of

Ukraine the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol are null
and void and shall be deemed unlawful.
-

-

The goals of nuclear non-proliferation demand that Russia ceases its
unlawful actions as well as abstains from any steps leading to the violation of
nuclear-free status of Ukraine.
Thank you, Mr Chairman

