Mr Chairman,
The United Kingdom fully supports the statement made on behalf of" the EU by the distinguished Ambassador of Germany. As a consequence of the time limitations imposed by late agreement of the agenda, I am intending only to highlight three or four issues of particular importance. Our full views will be tabled separately as a working paper of the meeting.
Verification of the non-proliferation aspects of this Treaty is work admirably undertaken by the IAEA whose Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements with Additional Protocols represent today's verification standard.
The United Kingdom continues to support UNSCR 1540 and offer assistance to helps others with its implementation. We encourage all states with capacity to do likewise. We support the development of implementation action plans and of good practice guidelines.
Mr Chairman,
Along with many others, we have continued to have strong, and increasing, concerns about the proliferation implications of Iran's nuclear programme. Iran has chosen to ignore offers to assist it in returning to compliance with its obligations, and in developing a modern nuclear power programme. Most recently it has chosen to ignore the mandatory requirements of the Security Council made in resolutions 1696, 1737 and 1747. We demand it now comply with the Security Council, and with the IAEA including through allowing full access to all IAEA inspectors, and the installation of appropriate monitoring equipment in its nuclear facilities, ii should also immediately and without demur suspend all enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities while agreements on long-term solutions are worked out.
The United Kingdom deplores the explosion of a nuclear device by the DPRK on 9 October 2006. We urge it to return to compliance with its commitments under the NPT and IAEA safeguards agreement and to comply fully with UNSCR 1718.
Mr Chairman, the United Kingdom supports the principle of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones and seeks to play an active and constructive role in their development. Our record on the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Raratonga and Pelindaba underline this.
We were, therefore, disappointed that the Central Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty was signed on 8 September 2006 without conclusion of consultations over the Treaty text and with serious issues outstanding. Despite our best efforts it has not proved possible to persuade the Central Asian States to resolve this issue. But the creation of a purported nuclear weapon free Zone that gives primacy to previous security arrangements, and that does not live up to the vision of Article VII of the NPT. left us with no option. We urge early ratification of the Treaty by the States of the Zone so that we can again seek to resolve our differences over these issues.
The UK reiterates its support for a Middle East Zone free of Weapons ol Mass Destruction and reaffirms its commitment to achieving the implementation of the Zone. In this respect, we continue to call on Israel, and all other non-signatories to the Treaty, to ratify the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states. The UK has also taken steps with other countries in the region to establish the conditions for a zone free of weapons of mass destruction. The United Kingdom has again, on the occasion of this PrepCom, submitted a report on the activities in which il has engaged to work towards full implementation of the Zone.
Thank you Mr Chairman