Main Committee II: Article III: Safeguards and Export Control
Remarks
Ambassador Laura E. Kennedy
Charge d'Affaires U.S. Mission to the International Organizations in Vienna
2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference, United Nations
New York City
May 7, 2015
(As Prepared for Delivery)
Mr. Chairman,
I am pleased to take the floor in thematic debate on Article III, which deals with
safeguards and export control. I refer delegates to the U.S. working paper number 45,
which addresses the issues before this Main Committee and its Subsidiary Body in
greater detail. Our activities in these areas are described in detail in our national
report, which is available on the U.S. State Department’s web site at
www.state.gov/t/isn/npt/index.htm.
In this session I plan to deal with the safeguards and export control provisions of
Article III. I intend to address nuclear security in the thematic debate on
nonproliferation.
Article III requires non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to conclude comprehensive
safeguards agreements with the IAEA. Such agreements are to cover all nuclear
material in peaceful use in the state. The IAEA Board of Governors decided that their
implementation should be designed to verify that a state’s declarations are correct and
complete – that is, that there are no undeclared nuclear materials or activities in the
state. An Additional Protocol gives the IAEA the stronger tools it needs to provide
assurances that a state’s declarations are complete and that this Article III requirement
is met. Therefore, the Additional Protocol is directly relevant to Article III.
Demands on the IAEA safeguards system have grown at a rate that far surpasses the
real increase in regular budget resources for safeguards. The United States supports
the continuing evolution of safeguards in a manner that improves efficiency and
effectiveness. But we emphasize that maintaining effectiveness is essential to the
credibility and integrity of the IAEA safeguards system.
Allow me to highlight a few of the recommendations in our working paper on these
issues. For example, the Conference could:
•
•

•

Emphasize the indispensable role of IAEA safeguards in the NPT regime and
in assuring the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Affirm that implementation of comprehensive safeguards agreements should
be designed to verify the correctness and completeness of a State’s
declarations.
Recognize the Additional Protocol as the standard, in conjunction with a
comprehensive safeguards agreement, for verifying that all nuclear material in

•
•

a country has been placed under safeguards, and that states are meeting the
NPT safeguards requirement.
Call on States that have not done so to bring an Additional Protocol into force.
Emphasize the importance of maintaining the credibility, effectiveness, and
integrity of the IAEA safeguards system, and stress that safeguards
implementation should remain transparent, non-discriminatory, and objective.

Mr. Chairman, IAEA safeguards are at the forefront in addressing serious challenges
to the nonproliferation regime, including unresolved cases of noncompliance with the
nonproliferation provisions of the Treaty. In this regard, we emphasize the
responsibility of the IAEA Board of Governors to report finding of noncompliance
with safeguards agreements, in accordance with Article XII.C of the IAEA Statute,
and the role of the UN Security Council in responding to any non-compliance that
constitutes a threat to international peace and security. We will have more to say
about the specific challenges in our statement to the Subsidiary Body, but allow be to
cite some of the recommendations in our working paper:
•

•
•

Take note of continuing concerns over unresolved cases of noncompliance
with nonproliferation obligations, and welcome diplomatic efforts to resolve
them.
Underscore the need to resolve all cases of noncompliance in order to preserve
the integrity of the Treaty and the IAEA safeguards system.
Call on States Parties to take concerted action to promote and pursue
diplomatic efforts to remedy all outstanding cases of noncompliance.

Article III also requires that safeguards be applied in connection with any transfer to a
non-nuclear weapon State of nuclear materials and equipment especially designed or
prepared for the processing, use, or production of special fissionable material. The
Zangger Committee has developed and periodically updated a list of items subject to
this requirement. The Nuclear Suppliers Group has developed Guidelines that apply
to a wider set of nuclear and nuclear-related dual use goods, services and technology,
and contain additional conditions on their transfer.
Like safeguards, nuclear export controls facilitate peaceful nuclear cooperation by
providing essential assurances that such cooperation will not contribute to the
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The United States has a comprehensive system of
export controls that helps fulfill U.S. obligations under Articles I and III of the Treaty
and UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004), as well as other UN Security
Council Resolutions pertaining to nuclear nonproliferation.
Article III states that comprehensive safeguards shall be implemented in a manner
designed to comply with Article IV and to avoid hampering development or
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. As I mentioned in general debate,
the United States has met its pledges to accept these same safeguards measures
through our own voluntary offer safeguards agreement and Additional Protocol. One
reason we do this is to demonstrate that accepting strong safeguards measures will not
put a State at any economic disadvantage. To the contrary, they facilitate nuclear
cooperation by building confidence that the fruits of such cooperation will not be
misused or diverted to the manufacture of nuclear weapons.

In this regard, for example, the Conference could:
•

•

•

•

Affirm that, in order to enable the fullest possible cooperation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, nuclear supply arrangements should provide
confidence that nuclear transfers will not contribute to nuclear proliferation.
Call for Parties to maintain export controls consistent with applicable relevant
UN Security Council resolutions to ensure that transfers for peaceful purposes
are not diverted for other purposes.
Welcome and encourage updates to export control guidelines and control lists
to take into account advances in technology and changes in procurement
practices.
Welcome and encourage cooperation among States Parties and through the
IAEA to achieve high standards of international safeguards, export control,
and nuclear security.

Thank you.
	  

