Statement by the United States in Cluster 2: Nonproliferation
First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Statement by Ambassador Robert A. Wood
Vienna, May 8, 2017

Mr. Chairman,
As we look toward the fiftieth anniversary of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, it is
important to recall the successes we have achieved and challenges we have faced
in advancing our shared nonproliferation goals. On the positive side, adherence to
the NPT is nearly universal. Most states have joined the Treaty and the vast
majority of those that did are committed to compliance with its terms. Several of
those states considered developing nuclear weapons and some took steps along that
path, but they concluded that it was not in their interest to do so. Instead, we
worked together to strengthen our common security by building the nuclear
nonproliferation regime. In so doing, we also built a framework of mutual
confidence that enables the fullest possible cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and a foundation on which to pursue disarmament as set forth in the Treaty.
The nuclear nonproliferation regime we built up is not a static set of rules, but a
dynamic, adaptive system that responds to challenges – and that must keep on
doing so. Its continued success depends on constant vigilance and improvement.
We responded to clandestine nuclear programs by strengthening the international
safeguards system and broadening export controls to cover dual-use goods and
technology. We responded to illicit procurement networks by strengthening
interdiction and enforcement measures. And we responded to the risk of nuclear
terrorism by strengthening nuclear security measures. By working to fill the gaps
in the nonproliferation regime, we have helped to slow and increase the costs of
proliferation and help deter it by heightening the risks of being caught. A critical
part of all these efforts has been cooperation and mutual assistance to build
capacity and ensure effectiveness.
Mr. Chairman,
Here in Vienna it is fitting to draw attention to the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its system of international safeguards. The Treaty sets out the basic

requirement for comprehensive safeguards, covering all nuclear material in all
peaceful nuclear activities in the state. It is up to the IAEA, in cooperation with
each state, to make sure those safeguards are implemented effectively.
Unfortunately, we have learned that even the robust implementation of
comprehensive safeguards is sometimes insufficient to deal with undeclared
nuclear material and activities. For the IAEA to provide assurances that states
have placed all nuclear material under safeguards – as required by the Treaty – it
needs the expanded information and access provided by the Additional Protocol.
This is why a comprehensive safeguards agreement, together with an Additional
Protocol, should be considered the de facto verification standard for assuring
compliance with the Treaty’s safeguards obligations. I urge all NPT Parties that
have not yet met the requirement to conclude a comprehensive safeguards
agreement as soon as possible. I also urge NPT Parties to conclude an Additional
Protocol and, where applicable, the modified version of the Small Quantities
Protocol. Furthermore, those of us who are IAEA Member States have a
responsibility to ensure that the Agency has the technical and financial resources
and the political support it needs to carry out its safeguards mission under the
Treaty.
The NPT also requires, in Article III, that exported nuclear material and equipment
be placed under safeguards. This basic export control requirement is necessary to
ensure that nuclear exports remain in peaceful use and are not diverted to weapons.
But it is not sufficient to ensure that nuclear-related cooperation and trade do not
contribute in other ways to the development of nuclear weapons. The Zangger
Committee and Nuclear Suppliers Group were formed over forty years ago to
develop common international guidelines for nuclear export controls designed to
minimize proliferation risks associated with nuclear cooperation and trade. The
control lists and guidelines have been updated periodically in response to
technological change and emerging proliferation developments. Over the years,
the membership of both regimes has grown and international nonproliferation
bodies and instruments have come to regard their guidelines and lists as the
standard for nuclear export control. The 2010 Review Conference encouraged NPT
Parties to make use of such guidelines and control lists in developing their own
national export controls.
Mr. Chairman,
There have been several cases of noncompliance that put at risk the benefits we all
derive from the Treaty. It is imperative that we work together to uphold the

integrity of the Treaty, to restore compliance, and to deter future violations. We
must continue to make clear that noncompliance comes at great cost and those
costs will continue until violations are remedied.
The UN Security Council plays a critical role in responding to noncompliance with
safeguards agreements and other NPT-related obligations. The Security Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, and the
proliferation of nuclear weapons poses a serious threat to international peace and
security. The Council has the unique and essential ability to require action,
including concerted action by states to impose costs and encourage compliance by
those whose noncompliance has created the threat. States should also be ready to
take action on their own to increase those costs.
We must also be prepared to address the potential for proliferation by and to nonstate actors. Starting with Resolution 1540, the Security Council required states to
have in place controls to prevent non-state actors from possessing nuclear weapons
or trafficking in related materials. To help prevent acts of nuclear and radiological
terrorism or sabotage, I encourage states to accede to the International Convention
on the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, to ratify the amendment to the
Conventional on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and participate actively
in the global nuclear security regime. The IAEA’s nuclear security program
provides essential guidance and assistance to IAEA Member States, and deserves
our full support.
Mr. Chairman,
As the nuclear nonproliferation regime has evolved and adapted to respond to new
threats, the measures we are all expected to put in place have expanded. This is a
challenge for all of us, but can seem particularly daunting for states with limited
experience in the nuclear field. But there is good news for states that may feel
overwhelmed by these requirements. First, the most stringent requirements for
safeguards, security, and export control apply to the most advanced nuclear
programs; requirements for states without significant nuclear activities can be quite
modest. Second, help is readily available, from the IAEA, the United States and
others, in the form of international standards and guidance, missions to assess the
needs of individual states, training and other assistance. These assistance programs
are designed to ensure that nonproliferation requirements are not an impediment to
the development of responsible nuclear programs, but build confidence that helps
those programs thrive.

The nuclear nonproliferation regime we have built together around the NPT has
made invaluable contributions to our shared security and prosperity. The key to its
success in the past, and to preserving those benefits for future generations, is our
ability to adapt to change and respond to challenges. The most important lesson
we have learned is that we can and must work together to advance these common
interests.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

