

Firstly, I would like to stress the importance given by my Country to the
Non-Proliferation of WMD not only at a global but also at a regional level
to promote international peace and security, as an objective firmly shared
by us.

Mr. Chairman.
In its insertion in the world peaceful nuclear market Argentina has
constantly applied an extremely prudent policy, conscious of the
commitments assumed in the field of non

—

proliferation and safeguards.

My country. as the only G77 and GRULAC Member State which is part in
the Iour major Exports rontrol Regimes deemc ‘cry important domestic


and Exports controls of goods under licensing requirements. In different
opportunities, we have chaired several of these mechanisms as the MTCR
and the NSG and we have very actively worked along as friendly nations
in this field, not only in technical issues but also in outreach.

Mr. Chairman

Much work rests to be done in the field of non-proliferation vis a vis the
destructive capacities shown by international terrorism. In this regard, it is
high time we consolidated IAEA’s work and its ongoing activities in the
field. So it is highly important to provide the Agency with the resources
needed in these endeavors as our Ministers have committed themselves in
the Declaration negotiated during the Conference on Nuclear Security held
in December last year.

Mr. Chairman.

The Middle East is a matter of utmost priority for many Delegations and
which presents some urgency in spite of the elapsed time without solution.

CHECK AGAiNST DELIVERY SUBMIflED ONLY FOR INTERPRE rATION PURPOSES
CL.EAN VERSION WILL BE DIRECTLY SENT IX) PAPERSMART
-

I lll re’zioq Ira’

lound

itself for

e

ciii decides in a

crossroad hich

lest i es an answer front not only the States of the region hut ako from the
‘

hole international (‘ommunht.

We think that the solution should be based in concrete steps. realist but
ambitious at the
ambitious

should

riot

md

same time rnd shieh ine itahly will conic from ‘in

inclt’sne consensus

this rep tnt “radu ml ippro’mches

In

be o erlooked if these Ld to the same ohjectn e shared by all ol

us. The participation by all States of this legion ssould favor the full
achieement ol these aims

hich are broadly shared by the International

(‘ommunity.

in this regard. the establishment of a Weapons of Mass Destruction Free
Zone. including Nuclear weapons. in the Middle East

the principle’

190’) ‘hould remni,e hit.

ecurrt% and under no t n’cumstance should these

I

wider

reached in I 95 and in the foIIowin Revie C nlcrenuc nor onider
them

in a selective manner.

Mr. Chairman,

\‘ly country

1

also conscious of the neces-,it ol keepina a tru\twoIih’

s eritication regime to avoid the development of nuclear programs
detense implications iifl(l protect peacctul
I In mankind common good.

USeS

V

itli

ot nuclear energy as a

IAEAs safeguards system

has become

iii

this

sense in a tundamental p11 tar of the international non—prol iteration regime.

Safeguards create a positive environment to enhance peaceful nuclear
cooperation. Its implementation must he guided by Article IV of the NPT
and the IAEAs Statute to preserve its credibility, effectiveness and
integrity and a strictly technical ground and effective transparent non
discriminatory and objective.

(HECK AGAINST DELIVERY SUBMITTED ONLY FOR INFERPRETAI ION P RPOSES
A CLEAN VERSION WILL BE DIRECTLY SEN F TO PAPERSMART

My country considers that no concept must be introduced without having
held an adequate, open and active consultation process with Member
States. Moreover, the introduction of any further obligation in terms of
safeguards than

the established

in

the Comprehensive

Safeguards

Agreements must depend upon the final sovereign decision of Member
States.

My country agrees with the importance of solving all cases of non

—

compliance with nuclear safeguards in conformity with IAEA’s Statute and
the legal obligations accepted by its Member States. They are cases which
were frequently marked by conflicts and past lack of confidence over non
peaceful nuclear activities which endangered international peace and
security. Regrettably some of them are still unresolved and create
concerns.

Ii- (Th ii i

iwm

As we said last Tuesday. Argentina and Brazil are celebrating the 25°
anniversary of the creation of the Argentine-Brazilian Agency for
Accountability and Control of Nuclear Materials, the only hi—national

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY SUBMrr1tD ONLY FOR INTERPRETATION PURPOSES
A CLEAN VERSION WILL BE DIRECTLY SENT TO PAPERSMART
-

system which put nuclear installations subject to mutual inspections within
a quadripartite Agreement with the IAI3A.

ABACC is a clear example of bilateral and regional safeguards providing

with assurances in the field of non-proliferation and playing a key role in
the promotion of transparency and mutual trust, especially between
neighboring

countries.

Therefore,

we

believe

that

safeguards

implementation at this level could be useful in trust building processes and

in contributing to preserve regional stability and international peace and
security in crucial areas.

Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear Weapons Free Zones play a key role and could have even a larger
one in the promotion of safeguards implementation throughout the
different regions of the world, especially when they are created through a
free arrangement by the States of the interested region and with conformity
to the UNDC guidelines approved in 1999.

NWFZ have become in different parts of the world a matter of mandatory

(1 IEC ‘IC AGAINST DELIVERY SUBMfl ThD ONLY FOR INTbRPREtTI0N Pt RPOSES
-‘ (‘LEAN VERSION WILL BE DIREC7LY SEN r TO PAPERSMART

reference when we speak about trust building processes at regional level.
In this

regard, and in a paradigmatic way.

Latin America and the

Caribbean

paved the way for due to the pioneers of Tiateloco whose spirit is visible in
the text of the Treaty bearing that name.

Facing the skepticism often characterizing the discussions on non
proliferation, I would like to recall that it took 27 years to obtain the
critical ratifications by States of our region to make the Treaty of
Tlatelolco enter into force. Furthermore, it is useful not to forget that it
included flexible clauses which consolidated the regime while political
conditions matured.

Ibis might led us to keep our optimism toss arch the cr111)
Patient negotiations about


in its reach and time scope, Argentina

agrees with the concrete steps already implemented which constitute a way
forward in the integral solution to this ditTerendum over Iran’s nuclear
program and a contribution in favor of non-proliferation and international
security.

Argentina underscores that this Agreement preserves the principle that any
violation of the NPT or any new attempt to develop Nuclear Weapons will
not he accepted by the International Community.

Argentina reaffirms time and again the intrinsic value of peaceful
settlement of controversies through dialogue and diplomacy as tools to
reach an enduring solution.
submitting all the necessary

In this regard. Jrans active
information and

the adoption

cooperation
of

in

the required

CHECK AGAINST DLzLIVbRY SIJBMIflED ONLY FOR INTERPRETATION PURPOSES
A CLEAN VERSION WILL BE DIRECTLY SENT TO PAPERSMAR1’

measures about its nuclear program is essential to ensure the
implementation of UN Security Council Resolutions and to enhance trust
in the peaceful nature of its nuclear program.

Mr. Chairman.

I would not likt to conclude without mentioning the decp conceins held by
iol’ its growing hut illegal nuclear program. Each of the nuclear tests
conducted has been of increasing power. and each consolidates further
l)PRK nuclear capacity. The latest event has shown potency in the
neighborhood of that of the artifact that destroyed Hiroshima. Here we can
ee.

also. the capacitY to niount a nuclear head on a ballistic missile which.

‘oincidenially contInue to he te%tcd and deseloped. aan’L triggered ‘in

tronz devun ration in the Seuriis (‘o,mcil.

Unfortunately. Mr. Chairman. the statements of condemnation that we are
hearing in this meeting. and other Ion throughout the world. fail to be
totally convincing when considered with the tact that the international

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY SUBMinuD ONLY FOR INTERPREI’ATION PURPOSES
A CLEAN VERSION WILL BE DIRECTLY SENT TO PAPERSMART
-

community has

not

been able to achieve the entering

into force of

the

Treaty that bans altogether these nuclear tests.

The DPRK continues such practices while the legal tool that would outlaw
them altogether is not yet in force.

It is hard to understand which is it, the right that countries are protecting
when they choose not to ratify the Treaty on a Nuclear-Test-Ban.

Is that perhaps the same “right” that the DPRK put into execution twice
last year?

With a Treaty in full force, the strength of our condemnation would be
fully backed by international law. It would be possible to put in place an
on-site inspection. All of that is not possible today. We will witness once
again the words of condemnation, but those words, Mr. Chairman, need to
be followed by concrete action.

We can only hope that this grim event will become a decisive call to action
so that —once and for all- we make the comprehensive ban on nuclear
testing a consolidated. indisputable and operative norm in international



Many thanks. Mr. Chairman

