Statement for Cluster II (Non-Proliferation)
Second Preparatory Committee for the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018

Mr Chairman
I have the honour to speak today on behalf of
Australia.
Preventing nuclear proliferation is as important today
as it was when the NPT was concluded. We must not
lose sight of the centrality of this Treaty to upholding
global peace and security.

Mr Chairman
Last year we reported that at the 2016 East Asia
Summit – the EAS – leaders had adopted a NonProliferation Statement addressing the strategic
challenge of nuclear non-proliferation. To give effect
to that statement, Australia and Thailand co-chaired

1

a successful EAS Seminar on Non-Proliferation in the
Indo-Pacific in Melbourne, Australia, in October 2017.

Mr Chairman
The DPRK’s development of nuclear weapons and
ballistic missiles, and its proliferation of sensitive
technologies, presents an unacceptable challenge
to the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
framework as established under the NPT and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
While we are encouraged by recent reports of a
preparedness between the DPRK and the US to talk,
and the announced halt in nuclear and ballistic
missile tests, this needs to be backed with genuine
and verifiable steps toward denuclearisation. Should
North Korea finally fulfil this obligation Australia
welcomes steps being taken by the international
community, including by the IAEA, to prepare for a
possible resumption of safeguards.
Australia will keep on working with a range of
international partners to ensure the strongest
possible response to actions by North Korea that
run counter to the NPT and in violation of
numerous UNSC resolutions. We call upon those
2

with influence on the DPRK to exert such
influence and intensify efforts to devise solutions.

Mr Chairman
Australia believes it is strongly in the interests the
international community and of Iran for the JCPOA to
be upheld and fully implemented. It is our view that
the JCPOA remains the best available mechanism to
assure the international community of Iran’s
commitment to conducting an entirely peaceful
nuclear program. We welcome the rigour the IAEA
applies to verifying Iran’s commitments.

Mr Chairman
In considering ways to strengthen the NPT, we
consider it timely to look more closely at the Article X
withdrawal provisions of the Treaty with a view to
establishing principles to govern the exercise of the
right of withdrawal. We commend to you the
suggested principles put forward by the Vienna Group
of Ten on how the NPT review process could
discourage withdrawal from the NPT, thereby
strengthening the Treaty.

3

Mr Chairman
Australia continues to offer its strong support to the
critical safeguards work of the IAEA.
Australia encourages all States to work with the IAEA
to conclude and implement a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol. Taken
together, Australia considers CSA and an AP to
constitute the verification standard under the NPT.
We remain concerned about outstanding issues
regarding the facilities and activities at the Dair
Alzour site in the Syrian Arab Republic. Australia
urges Syria to fully cooperate with the IAEA.
On the broader issue of nuclear security, Australia is
pleased to join Spain and Canada in a working paper
underlining the synergies between the NPT and the
need to ensure the higher standards of nuclear
security.

Mr Chairman
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
remains a fundamental element of the nonproliferation architecture and complementary to the
objectives of the NPT. Australia is proud to host 21
4

fully operational International Monitoring System
(IMS) stations. We also look forward together with
other Friends of the CTBT to co-hosting the 9th
Friends of the CTBT Ministerial Meeting in New York
in September.
Australia emphasises the importance of ensuring
entry into force of the Treaty and urges all States yet
to do so to promptly sign and ratify the CTBT,
particularly the eight remaining Annex 2 States. To
this end, we welcome news of Thailand’s imminent
ratification of the Treaty. Pending CTBT entry into
force, it is essential that a moratorium on all
explosive nuclear testing is maintained.

Mr Chairman
Strict export controls are the bedrock of effective
domestic efforts to ensure that legitimate trade,
including nuclear material, and equipment and
technologies for peaceful purposes does not
contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons of
mass destruction. We take this opportunity to note
the admission of India this year to the Wassenaar
Group and Australia Group, which represents a
significant strengthening of these two groupings.

5

Mr Chairman
Australia, as you would be aware is a long-standing
supporter of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones (NWFZs),
which we consider strengthen the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime.

Mr Chairman
Central to fostering international confidence and
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, the NPT’s
achievements and value is enduring and must not be
overlooked or taken for granted. Australia stands
ready to work constructively with other States party
to ensure the continued strengthening of this key
element of the international rules based order.
Thank you, Mr Chairman

6

