2012 Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I1 Debate (Non-Proliferation)
Statement by Australia
Mr Chairman
Over forty years since its entry into force, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) remains
the cornerstone of efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and reduce their numbers to zero.
There can be no doubt that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing.
In order to achieve our shared goal of a world free of nuclear weapons, it is important that all
NPT states parties work together to implement all agreed outcomes of the 2010 Review
Conference.
A11 NPT states parties have committed to report on their activities to implement the consensus
20 10 Review Conference Action Plan, in accordance with Action 20. Australia, for its part, has
submitted to this PrepCom a comprehensive, Action-by-Action report of our national
implementation efforts. We strongly encourage all NPT states parties to do likewise.
Mr Chairman
Australia's support for a strong non-proliferation and safeguards regime, as envisaged under
Articles I, I1 and 111 of the NPT, is unwavering.
All States Parties have a common interest in ensuring that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) can effectively carry out its safeguards implementation and verification mandate.
The IAEA safeguards system provides a practical means for non-nuclear-weapon states (NNWS)
to access nuclear energy and technologies, while providing assurance that they are doing so for
exclusively peaceful purposes. This establishes a vital foundation for nuclear trade and
cooperation, while maintaining efforts for nuclear disarmament.
Mr Chairman
States which have taken on NPT commitments must maintain full compliance with those
obligations. Not to do so undermines the collective security benefits provided by the Treaty.
Australia remains deeply concerned by Iran's continued development of sensitive nuclear
technology, in violation of its NPT and IAEA obligations.
We call on all NPT states parties to make a strong, united response to any findings of noncompliance by states with their NPT and IAEA commitments, including by referral to the UN
Security Council. We further urge all states parties to fully implement all relevant UNSC
resolutions.
It is disappointing that some states parties have not yet fulfilled even the most basic NPT
requirement of concluding Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements (CSA) with the IAEA. We
urge those states to take steps for the early conclusion of a CSA.

Mr Chairman
A strengthened safeguards system is essential to addressing the problem of undeclared nuclear
activities. Australia maintains that a CSA, together with an Additional Protocol (AP), represents
the verification standard pursuant to Article 111.1 of the Treaty. We urge all states yet to do so to
conclude and implement an AP as soon as possible, particularly those states with significant
nuclear activities. Afier all, it has been 15 years since the IAEA adopted the Model '4P.
In July 201 0, Australia joined with nine other countries to establish the Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), dedicated to taking forward the 20 10 Review Conference
outcomes. NPDI has, as one of its priorities, the promotion of the universal adoption of an AP.
The NPDI has submitted a joint working paper on the Additional Protocol to this PrepCom.
Mr Chairman
Effective national controls over the export of nuclear materials and technology - and international
coordination in the application of those export controls - are legitimate and necessary for the
implementation of states' obligations under Article I11 of the Treaty and relevant UN Security
Council resolutions.
Strictly enforced export controls, consistent with the major nuclear export control regimes, foster
the environment of confidence necessary for nuclear cooperation.
Mr Chairman
Australia strongly supports nuclear weapon-free zones (NWFZ), freely arrived at by regional
states, and recognises the important role they play in reinforcing international non-proliferation
and disarmament norms and obligations.
Pending the negotiation of multilateral security assurances, such zones also provide a valuable
means for NNWS to obtain assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Australia supports the negotiation of NWFZs which are consistent with the 1999 UN
Disarmament Commission Guidelines on establishing such zones; which do not erode existing
rights under international law to freedom of navigation and overflight; and which make genuine
efforts to attract the constructive support of the NWS.
We welcome US President Barack Obama's personal support for United States' ratification of the
relevant protocols to the Treaty of Rarotonga and the Treaty of Pelindaba. We also congratulate
the NWS and ASEAN members for their progress towards signature by the NWS of the protocol
to the Treaty of Bangkok.

Mr Chairman
Australia looks forward to working with other delegations to strengthen and advance the NPT's
non-proliferation principles at this meeting, and through to the 201 5 Review Conference.
Thank you.

