Check against delivery
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
22 April – 3 May 2013
Cluster II
Delegation of Austria
Statement by Ms Christine Göstl
26 April 2013
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to start by referring to the statements and working papers for this review cycle of
the European Union to which the Austrian delegation fully aligns herself. In addition, Austria
has worked within the Vienna Group of 10 on a number of working papers, some of which
relate to cluster II. Let me also refer to the general statement that was delivered by Australia
on behalf of the Vienna Group.
Under cluster II, we would like to take the opportunity to highlight that Austria, as part of the
European Union as well as in her national capacity, has made efforts to support and to
diligently implement the actions in the non-proliferation cluster, i.e. actions 23 to 46 of the
action plan. Austria has also submitted an implementation report to this meeting; the report
has been issued in document PC.II/1. Therefore, I will limit this statement to a single issue, an
issue on which Austria traditionally has had a lead drafting role for the respective working
paper of the Vienna Group. We believe that this issue would benefit from a more focussed
discussion within the NPT community in the future.
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions in Action 36 encourage
States parties to make use of multilaterally negotiated and agreed guidelines and
understandings in developing their own national export controls. Austria would like to
emphasize that it is important that all States should apply the Understandings of the Zangger
Committee in their respective export control regimes. This would help further uniformity of
approach and fairness in international trade.
Similarly, Austria also would like to highlight the important and useful role that the Nuclear
Suppliers Group Guidelines play in the development of national export control policies. These
Guidelines are an important contribution to the international non-proliferation regime and are
up-dated whenever necessary. Again, all States are encouraged to apply these Guidelines in
the respective export control regimes. Austria also notes that, indeed, these Guidelines find
increasing acceptance and application by national authorities and that the number of states
participating in export control regimes continues to grow. Recent examples are the
participation of Mexico in the Nuclear Suppliers Group, and as by next week, also of Serbia.
This growth in acceptance of the export control regimes may have the potential to move
beyond the circle of current States Parties to the NPT. This could present an opportunity to
strengthen the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

Indeed, we, as States Parties, are responsible to ensure that our nuclear-related exports do not
directly or indirectly assist the development of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices and that such exports are in full conformity with the objectives and purposes of the
Treaty. A universal approach to the implementation of Article III, including universal
application of export control guidelines, could become the logical mirror image of the
universality of the NPT and, related to that, of the comprehensive safeguards agreements
complemented by an additional protocol.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to end this statement by confirming Austria’s support for stepping up
international efforts against proliferation, pursuing disarmament and assuring a responsible
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the best safety, security and nonproliferation conditions by countries wishing to develop their capacities in this field.
Thank you.

