Check against delivery
IX. Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
April 27 – May 22 2015
Cluster II
Delegation of Austria
Statement delivered by Georg Pöstinger

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, I would like to refer to the statement by the European Union, on Cluster II
to which the Austrian Delegation is aligned. In addition, Austria has worked within the
Vienna Group of 10 on a number of “Vienna issues”, some of which relate to Cluster II.
Let me also refer to the statements that were delivered by Australia on behalf of the
Vienna Group of 10. Furthermore, the Austrian National Report, submitted last year as
well as this year’s update covers all pillars of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Despite efforts to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and extending it to
the remaining countries, the extended IAEA comprehensive safeguards system pursuant
to the NPT is yet to become universally applied. At the same time, the strengthening of
the safeguards system has at least two important effects: First, with the efficient
implementation of a strengthened safeguard system, it is possible to detect undeclared
activities; second, such a system in place results in increased confidence within the
international community with regard to the peaceful nature of the nuclear programs in
individual countries. This enhances confidence, reduces mistrust and the likelihood of
conflicts about alleged nuclear weapons programs.
While the costs and efforts related to inspection regimes may seem high to some, the
benefits and potential peace dividend certainly outweighs these resource-intensive
efforts. This is certainly true in the context of regions where transparency, mutual trust
and confidence are lacking. We have been very encouraged about the negotiation
progress by the EU 3+3 and Iran and the framework agreement to comprehensively

resolve the open questions and concerns about the Iranian nuclear program. We hope
that these negotiations will lead to a successful conclusion and a good result in the
crucial coming weeks. If they are, this would be an important gain for the credibility of
the NPT. Austria is pleased to have contributed to the talks of the EU 3+3 and Iran by
providing the venue and related services during some of the negotiation rounds.
Austria has already expressed its views with regard to the DPRK nuclear weapons and
missiles program during the general debate.
Mr. Chairman,
As nuclear technology evolves and spreads wider across the globe, export regimes have
to be adjusted. In past years, the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers Group
have undertaken updates of their lists. At the same time, new members have been
admitted or have expressed interest in membership. These developments have an
impact on the functioning of these export control regimes. As a consequence, there is a
need for more in-depth and “out-of-the-box” reflection about the nature and evolution
of these regimes and their relationship to the NPT.
In order to strengthen the NSG as an effective arrangement in the field of nonproliferation and export controls, Austria together with Germany and the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace recently hosted and international workshop entitled
“The Future of NSG Participation and Adherence”. The primary topic of the workshop
was to discuss the impact of widening NSG participation, in particular to countries that
are not parties to the NPT, on the non-proliferation and export control regimes.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria fully supports the goal of a WMD Free Zone in the Middle East and we note the
efforts that have been undertaken in this respect in the past review cycle. We, too, regret
that the conference that was supposed to launch this extremely important process could
not be held as yet and we understand the disappointment of the countries in the region.
Austria hopes that one of the outcomes of the Review Conference will be renewed
momentum that the Conference intended to launch this important process can be
convened as early as possible and that a clear outcome can be defined. We welcome the
working papers and many statements that have been presented on this issue as a clear
indication of the continued interest of the whole NPT membership to take this
important initiative forward.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

