AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA
Australian Mission to the United Nations

E-mail australia@un.int

150 East 42nd Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.australia-unsc.gov.au

THE NINTH REVIEW OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
4 May 2015

Main Committee II
Statement by Mr. Darren Hansen
First Secretary
Australian Mission to the United Nations
(Check against delivery)

Mr Chairman
I congratulate you on your election.

It is an honour to be given the

opportunity to address this committee on Australia’s behalf.
Mr Chairman
Australia firmly supports the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as the
cornerstone of the non-proliferation regime. For the past 45 years, this
Treaty has provided important security benefits to all States. Our collective
commitment to the Treaty has prevented a global nuclear arms race and
contained the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

We must continue to

reaffirm our support for the norms established by the Treaty.

-2-

Mr Chairman
A country pursuing nuclear proliferation activities could threaten
international peace and security, threaten the integrity of the NPT and
potentially undermine the global non-proliferation architecture.

In this

regard, Australia remains deeply concerned by the actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) which, alone among nations in the
twenty-first century, maintains an active nuclear explosive testing program,
challenging the non-proliferation regime and contravening the international
norm that has already been established by the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty. We strongly urge the DPRK to abandon all nuclear weapons
and existing nuclear programs and to return to compliance with its IAEA
safeguards agreement and the NPT. No States Parties should be silent on
this matter.
On a more positive note, Australia welcomes the announcement of a
framework between the E3+3 and Iran on the parameters of a comprehensive
agreement over Iran’s nuclear program on 2 April 2015.

This is an

important step in progress towards a final agreement that we hope will
address international concerns about Iran’s nuclear program. We urge Iran
to engage constructively with the E3+3 to complete the negotiations for the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action by the end of June.
Mr Chairman
Australia has been a strong supporter of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) since its inception in 1957. The IAEA safeguards system
provides an essential service to the NPT and the international community. It
provides a practical means by which non-nuclear-weapon States can
demonstrate their commitment to use nuclear energy exclusively for
peaceful purposes, while providing assurance that others are doing the same.

-3-

The assurance the safeguards system delivers is not only essential to
preventing nuclear weapons proliferation, but also fundamental to ensuring
confidence in trade and cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear
technology and an important factor in continuing progress on nuclear
disarmament. The IAEA needs to receive adequate resources if safeguards
are to remain an effective instrument for verification, as required by the
NPT.
Consistent with Actions 25 and 28 of the 2010 Action Plan, Australia calls
on all states yet to conclude and implement a Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and Additional Protocol with the IAEA to do so without delay.
The combination of a CSA and AP represents the verification standard of the
Treaty. But safeguards are not static. As agreed at the 1995 and 2010
RevCons, safeguards should be continually assessed. The Agency should
therefore be supported in taking steps to ensure safeguards remain effective.
Mr Chairman
Australia recognises the need to ensure that relevant export control
guidelines keep pace with technological and other developments. As part of
these efforts and consistent with Australia’s position as a member of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), we urge all States Parties to establish,
maintain and implement effective export controls over nuclear and nuclearrelated dual-use items and technology. In addition, we encourage all States
Parties to harmonise their export controls with those of the NSG and
Zangger Committee guidelines.
Compliance with IAEA safeguards is a prerequisite for the supply of
Australian uranium to any country and ensures that Australia’s uranium
supply is only ever used for peaceful purposes. Australia continues to abide

-4-

by NSG rules and to meet its international obligations as a nuclear supplier
in accordance with Action 35.
Mr Chairman
Nuclear Weapon Free Zones (NWFZs) play an important role in
strengthening the non-proliferation and disarmament regime by establishing
regions in which the manufacture, acquisition, possession, stationing and
testing of nuclear weapons is prohibited.
As a long-standing supporter of NWFZs, Australia strongly supports the
early convening of a conference on the establishment of a Middle-East
Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone.

We encourage all interested

States Parties in the region to engage in a spirit of genuine and constructive
cooperation to convene a Middle East Weapons of Mass Destruction Free
Zone conference.
Mr Chairman

Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons is in the interests of all
States and should be pursued with vigour, resilience and determination. It is
central to the NPT’s continuing relevance. It is our shared responsibility to
support new initiatives to strengthen the global non-proliferation regime and
ensure that no more States or non-State actors ever acquire nuclear weapons.

Finally, Australia commends to you the recommendations of the NonProliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) which are contained in the
joint working paper submitted to this conference.

Thank you Mr Chairman.

