BRAZIL
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Pedro Motta Pinto Coelho
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the Conference on Disarmament

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee II

N ew York, 4 May 2015

(check against delivery)

Mr. Chairman,
Let me first associate myself with previous speakers in congratulating you on
assuming the chairmanship of this Committee. Please be assured of the full
cooperation and support of the Brazilian delegation in carrying out your tasks.
Brazil's fundamental message to this Review Conference has been stated in the
General Debate: the measure of success of the implementation of the Treaty is
related to the fulfillment of the original Treaty's compromise. The persistent
implementation gap between non-proliferation and disarmament obligations
discredits the NPT bargain and threatens to corrode the foundation upon which
the regime was built.
Non-proliferation has been the most successful ofthe three pillars ofthe NPT. With
one exception, none of the 185 States that have become parties to the Treaty as
non-nuclear-weapon States has since built or acquired a nuclear weapon or a
nuclear explosive device. These States have been complying with their obligations
under the Treaty and keeping their end of the fundamental bargain.
In this connection, Brazil remains supportive of IAEA efforts to promote more
efficient and effective safeguards, in strict accordance with the relevant legal
instruments entered into by Member States with the Agency. We welcome, in

particular, the intensive consultation process between the IAEA Secretariat and
Member States in clarifying the so-called "State-level Concept". Brazil looks
forward to working with the Secretariat on practical arrangements for the
implementation of appropriate safeguards measures for use in the field, if such
arrangements are not already in place.
In fact, Brazil, along with and Argentina, entered into an arrangement - the
Quadripartite Agreement, between Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for the Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) and the IAEA
-which submitted our nuclear programs to a double verification system of
safeguards three years before the Model Additional Protocol was approved.
Mr. Chairman,
The compliance record by non-nuclear weapon States stands in stark contrast to
the implementation of disarmament commitments by nuclear-weapon States. In
practice, 45 years after entry into force of the NPT, the burden of the regime
remains almost excluSively on the non-nuclear-weapon States. This situation is in
itself unjustifiable and unsustainable, and it is for that reason that this Conference
has a special responsibility on the Disarmament pillar.
It is thus striking to see the recurrence of suggestions usually by nuclear-weapon
States or States members of military alliances based on the use of nuclear weapons
that, if adopted, would serve not only to maintain the present implementation gap,
but actually to widen it, with the imposition of yet additional obligations on those
same countries that are already doing their part - the non-nuclear-weapon States.
Two such suggestions are of particular concern: (i) that the Additional Protocol,
together with a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA), constitutes "the
verification standard" pursuant to Article 111.1 of the NPT; and (ii) that the
Additional Protocol should be required as a condition for the supply of nuclear
items to non-nuclear-weapon States.
The verification standard pursuant to the NPT is clearly set out in the Treaty's text,
particularly in Articles 111.1 and I1I.4. These provisions leave no doubt that the
verification standard is that enshrined in the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements that were to be negotiated with the IAEA shortly after entry into force
of the NPT.
It is one thing to note that Member States in the IAEA subsequently agreed to
develop measures or instruments aimed at improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of safeguards, and that a State may conclude that it is in its interest to
implement these measures or to sign and ratify an Additional Protocol.
As a legal matter, however, such developments must not be confused with the
obligation to conclude an agreement with the IAEA in order to comply with the

requirements of Articles 111.1 and IlIA of the NPT. Developing the model for such
an agreement was a task that was completed soon after the NPT entered into force.
And negotiating and concluding such an agreement with the IAEA is a task that has
been completed by most ofthe non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT.
To make the Additional Protocol part of the "verification standard" pursuant to
Article III of the NPT would require an amendment of the Treaty. Without such an
amendment, this claim amounts to an exercise in evolutionary interpretation that
has no basis in international law.
For the same reasons, the suggestion to make the Additional Protocol a necessary
condition for the supply of goods and technology to non-nuclear-weapon States
finds no basis in the NPT. Moreover, if adopted, it would counter the letter and the
spirit of Article IV.2 of the Treaty, which commits all the parties to the Treaty to
"facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy".
We expect States parties to join Brazil in rejecting these suggestions, first, because
they are not supported by and may even go against the provisions of the NPT, and,
second, because they further aggravate the Treaty's inherent imbalance and
discrimination - which is exactly the opposite of what we should strive to achieve
in this Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
For the Brazilian delegation, as regards nuclear non-proliferation, this Review
Conference should, among others:
- recognize that the NPT has been highly successful in preventing nuclear
proliferation throughout its 45 years of existence;
- recognize that, for non-proliferation to be sustainable over the long term, nuclear
weapons must not be relied upon by any State as an essential means for its
security, and that the complete elimination of nuclear weapons is therefore the
only way to remove incentives to proliferate;
- call upon all States parties which have not yet done so to conclude and bring into
force comprehensive safeguards agreements with the IAEA in accordance with
Article III of the Treaty;
- encourage the IAEA to assist those States parties in the conclusion and entry into
force of comprehensive safeguards agreements;
- recommend that IAEA safeguards be assessed and evaluated regularly, and that
measures aimed at further strengthening the effectiveness and improving the
efficiency of IAEA safeguards be considered in close consultation and coordination

with Member States while ensuring consistency with their respective safeguards
agreements with the Agency;
- recognize that the largest stockpiles
possessing nuclear weapons and are
accounting and control, and thus call for
to nuclear material in nuclear-weapon
Treaty;

of nuclear materials are in the States
not subject to multilaterally verified
the wider application of IAEA safeguards
States and in States not parties to the

- call upon States parties to facilitate, pursuant to Article IV of the Treaty, the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological
information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with non-nuclear-weapon
States parties to the Treaty, without the imposition of conditions that are not
called for by the NPT.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, Brazil joins others in voicing our disappointment with the
postponement of the Conference on the Establishment of a Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East, which should
have taken place in 2012, as provided for by the 2010 NPT Action Plan. Brazil
believes that the successful convening of the Conference represents an integral
part of the NPT - and, in this specific case, maintaining the status quo and failing to
fulfill a mandate that dates from 1995 means to regress. In our view, the
Conference must be held at the earliest possible date. We urge all countries of the
region, without exception, to attend it, as it can represent the beginning of a
process designed to foster confidence-building measures among neighboring
States.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

