BRAZIL
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Third session

Cluster 2

New York, 1 May 2014

Statement by

H.E. Ambassador Pedro Motta Pinto Coelho
Permanent Representative of Brazil
to the Conference on Disarmament

(check against delivery)

Mr. Chairman,
Non-proliferation has undoubtedly been the most successful of the three pillars of the
NPT. 44 years after the Treaty's entry into force, the non-nuclear-weapon States have
been complying with their obligations under the Treaty and keeping their end of the
fundamental bargain at its core, in stark contrast to the implementation of the
disarmament commitments under Article VI by the nuclear-weapon States.
Nuclear disarmament is essential to nuclear non-proliferation. As long as nuclear
weapons exist, there will be States and non-State actors tempted to acquire or develop
them. In this regard, Brazil sees nuclear disarmament as the best antidote to nuclear
proliferation.
Brazil is fully committed to its non-proliferation commitments. Besides being Party to the
NPT, Brazil is also Party to the Tlatelolco Treaty and to the CTBT. Our nuclear facilities
are subject to safeguards not only from the IAEA, but also from the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for the Accounting and Control of Nuclear Material (ABACC), the only of its
kind in the world. Our Federal Constitution expressly determines that the use of nuclear
energy shall be solely for peaceful purposes. We support nuclear non proliferation
because we are against nuclear weapons, no matter who holds them.
We cannot accept, however, that the burden of the NPT Regime continue to fall
exclusively on the non-nuclear weapon States, with the increasing imposition of
obligations that affect only those who already faithfully comply with their Treaty
obligations.
While Brazil fully respects the sovereign decision of those States that decided to sign an
Additional Protocol with the Agency, we recall that INFCIRC/540 was approved by the
IAEA Board of Governors in the understanding of its voluntary nature, a fact that is
officially reflected in that body’s records. The 2010 Action Plan also recognized that “it
is the sovereign decision of any State to conclude an additional protocol”. Furthermore,
Action 30 of the 2010 Action Plan stated that "additional protocols should be universally
applied once the complete elimination of nuclear weapons has been achieved". It is very
unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, that we seem to be incredibly far from reaching this point.
Brazil has also actively participated in the discussions regarding the implementation of a
“State Level Approach” by the IAEA. We understand that the relationship of the Agency
with its Member States must be guided by existing agreements between both and the
commitments derived from them. Objectivity must guide the Agency’s work. We
welcome the fact that the IAEA is engaged in a consultation process with Member States
on the State Level Approach, whose parameters must, in our view, be subject to approval
by the Board of Governors.
Mr. Chairman,
Brazil is firmly committed to the objective of nuclear non-proliferation. We believe,
however, that any approach that focuses exclusively on this pillar, in prejudice of
2

necessary progress on nuclear disarmament, is doomed to failure. It is necessary to
demand coherence from the nuclear weapon States, which continue to raise security
reasons as justification for the maintenance and modernization of their nuclear arsenals.
That is, in our view, an argument that only contributes to the erosion of the credibility of
the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

