
The integrity of the NPT and the security and nuclear technology benefits that flow from it are dependent on the fulfilment of obligations. Central among these obligations are the acceptance of safeguards by Non-Nuclear Weapon States Parties on all source and special fissionable material and the adoption by all States Parties of export controls, as required by Article III.
The IAEA safeguards system continues to evolve as a result of the verification challenges that it encounters. Canada has long been a strong supporter of this evolution and commends the IAEA for undertaking a fundamental shift in its approach from a facility-level to a State-level perspective. This new approach allows the IAEA to adapt its use of resources to the particular set of conditions existing in a given State while maintaining or enhancing the level of assurances provided.
While recognising the value of a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) in providing measures for verifying the non-diversion of declared nuclear material, we are conscious that such measures are limited and not sufficient for the Agency to provide credible assurances regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities. We therefore consider it necessary for a CSA to be supplemented by an Additional Protocol (AP) and that these instruments together form the verification standard under Article III of the Treaty. Together, a CSA and an AP enable the IAEA to draw the most comprehensive possible conclusion regarding a State's nuclear program - namely the broad conclusion that all nuclear material within the State remains in peaceful use. We encourage the IAEA to move as expeditiously as possible towards drawing the broad conclusion for those States with a CSA and an AP in force.
With regard to recourse to the UN Security Council, Canada reiterates the important role that the UN Security Council must continue to play to reinforce the integrity and credibility of the NPT and its key instruments, including the IAEA, as the UNSC has done most recently concerning the DPRK and Iran. In accordance with its Statute, the IAEA must continue to have access to the Security Council.
Concerning export controls, the Treaty requires that each State Party undertake not to provide specified nuclear materials and technology, unless the transfers are subject to the safeguards required by Article III of the Treaty. The need for robust national export control systems is only reinforced by recent revelations of extensive covert networks related to the procurement and supply of sensitive nuclear equipment and technology. We underline the need for all States to exercise vigilance.
Multilateral export-control regimes play a crucial role in facilitating legitimate nuclear trade among States while respecting non-proliferation commitments. Canada continues to value the work of the Zangger Committee and encourages all States Parties to adopt its Understandings. Canada also places great value on other efforts to coordinate national export control policies and practices, and we believe the Nuclear Suppliers Group continues to play a particularly useful role in this regard.
Transfers of proliferation-sensitive nuclear equipment and technology used for enrichment and reprocessing must continue to receive special attention. Canada remains
of the view that the development of a set of stringent, internationally-agreed criteria for such transfers is the best approach.
Concerning physical protection and illicit trafficking, Canada underlines the importance of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and welcomes the adoption in July 2005 of an important amendment which substantially strengthens the Convention. We urge all States Parties that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and implement both the Convention and the amendment thereto.
We encourage all States Parties to act in accordance with the IAEA's Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources and its accompanying Guidance on the Import and Export of Radioactive Sources. Canada is implementing both and, in accordance with these standards, has recently taken a number of other steps to substantially strengthen controls on radiological sources.
In support of the many efforts underway by various stakeholders, we encourage enhanced cooperation among States Parties and international organizations to prevent, detect and respond to the illicit trafficking of nuclear and other radioactive materials.
With regard to cooperative threat reduction, Canada underlines the important contribution of the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. Canada has committed up to C$1 billion over ten years to this initiative. The IAEA plays a particularly important role in this area and Canada is a strong supporter of its efforts, having contributed over $8 million to the Agency's Nuclear Security Fund. We call on all States Parties to make a substantial contribution to nuclear security.
Finally, I would like to address Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones. We recognize the importance of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones to the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime and the contribution they can make to regional and global security. Canada strongly supports the role that the various regional treaties are playing in this regard. In this light, we encourage the development of new Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in the Middle East and South Asia.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
