

Mr Chairman,
States Parties' full compliance with their NPT Safeguards Agreement obligations, as
administered by the International Atomic Energy Agency, is a treaty obligation under Article Ill.
Canada urges States Parties to consider how we can collectively ensure the return to NPT
Article Ill compliance by lran and North Korea.
IAEA Director General Amano's latest quarterly report on lran illustrates yet again Iran's failure
to cooperate with the IAEA and a flagrant disregard for its safeguards obligations. There have
been ten consecutive vears of IAEA Board of Governors meetings in which Iran's noncompliance has been on the agenda. That a decade has passed with virtually no progress is
unacceptable to Canada, and should be equally unacceptable to all NPT States Parties. Despite
ten years of concerted effort by the IAEA to engage lran in good faith, lran continues to
obfuscate and refuses to answer critical questions about its nuclear program.

Furthermore, it has been six years since the Agency and lran began direct talks to address
Iran's non-compliance with its Safeguards Agreement. Yet again, despite the ample window
provided, there is no evidence that lran has engaged or intends to engage in good faith. Iranian
inferences that an agreement with the Agency is close and that they are willing to cooperate
belie the absence of any substantive progress.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper and Foreign Minister John Baird have repeatedly asserted that
lran remains the biggest threat to international peace and security.

Mr Chairman,
Canada is fully confident that, after nine rounds of talks, the iAEA has made every reasonable
effort to conclude a structured approach with lran to investigate nuclear weapons related
research and development activities in Iran. The implication of the Agency's decision in
February to suspend talks and take "time to reflect" is clear: lran is unwilling to accept the
"effective verification measures'' that are necessary. Iran's unanswered questions about the
credible evidence that it undertook, and continues to undertake, nuclear weapons-related
research and development is a clear violation of Article Ill. NPT States Parties need real
answers, through the IAEA as the safeguards verification body under the Treaty, to the grave
concerns posed by Iran's nuclear program.
The IAEA Director General continues to report that, contrary to its Safeguards Agreement, lran
is not implementing the provisions of modified Code 3.1 of its Subsidiary Arrangements. The
fact that lran is not implementing modified Code 3.1 - the only NPT State Party that does not prevents the Agency from providing the international community with assurances about the
nature of Iran's nuclear program. Supplying early nuclear facility design information to the IAEA
allows for the implementation of appropriate verification measures and gives the international
community confidence that a state's nuclear activities are peaceful in nature.
While recognizing the rights of NPT States Parties, Canada has serious concerns over Iran's
increasing uranium enrichment capacities specifically Iran's production of 20% enriched
uranium, which consumes 90% of the effort necessary to produce weapons-grade nuclear
material. The January 2013 notification to the IAEA that lran would begin installing IR-2m
centrifuges at Natanz is yet another violation of UN Security Council and IAEA Board of
Governors resolutions on Iran's nuclear program.

-

The IAEA Director General continues to report ongoing sanitization efforts at Parchin and Iran's
continuing refusal to allow the Agency access to the site. The Parchin site is meaningful due to
the nuclear weapons-related testing alleged to have taken place there.
Mr Chairman,
lran oflen claims that IAEA and UN Security Council resolutions brought against it stem from a
desire to prevent Iran from having access to nuclear energy or to undermine NPT Article IV.
This claim is proven to be patently false, however, by the numerous resolutions of the IAEA
Board of Governors and the UN Security Council explicitly permitting the development of a
nuclear power program in lran, including the international project to build and operate the
Bushehr reactor. To be clear, resolutions brought against lran stem from its undeclared nuclear
fuel cycle, its failure to cooperate with the Agency, its failure to comply with its Safeguards
Agreement, its failure to actively comply with investigations by the Agency into activities such as
those underway at Parchin, and its failure to account for past and ongoing actions.
lran is required by binding resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors and UN Security Council
to take steps towards the full implementation of its Safeguards Agreement and other related
obligations, including implementation of an Additional Protocol. It has failed to do so. The crisis
over Iran's nuclear program has persisted for ten years and the international community simply
cannot allow this impasse to continue. States Parties cannot allow a third NPT Review
Conference to come and go without addressing Iran's ongoing nuclear non-compliance. We
believe that such inaction would seriously undermine the global non-proliferation regime.
Mr Chairman,

The security and stability of Northeast Asia continue to be threatened by the irresponsible
nuclear activities of and proliferation by North Korea. Two ballistic missile tests in 2012 and
North Korea's third nuclear test of February 12, 2013 have further and greatly exacerbated the
threat it poses to the Korean Peninsula and beyond. Canada condemned each of these
violations by North Korea of its non-proliferation obligations in the strongest possible terms. In
this regard, Canada co-sponsored the latest UN Security Council Resolution expanding
sanctions against North Korea and pledging further significant action in the event of a further
missile launch or nuclear test. Canada already has in place sanctions that go above and beyond
those of the UN Security Council.
In order to bring peace and stability to the Korean Peninsula, we strongly urge North Korea to
re-engage in the NPT review cycle, to adhere to its Safeguards Agreement and to fully
implement all relevant non-proliferation and disarmament obligations. The IAEA has an
essential role to play in the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and Canada appreciates
the Agency's readiness to monitor nuclear activities in North Korea including uranium
enrichment, despite being unable to implement any safeguards measures there since its
inspectors were expelled in 2009. North Korea recently reminded the international community of
the essential role the IAEA has to play when it announced plans to restart the Yongbyon nuclear
complex for its nuclear program. It is deeply regrettable that a country unable to feed its own
people continues to expend so much of its limited resources on these military programs. North
Korea must refrain from further provocative acts, including it unrepentantly belligerent threats
and rhetoric. It must re-join the international non-proliferation community by renouncing its
nuclear weapons aspirations, and by immediately disarming.

Finally Mr Chairman,
As pointed out by High RepresentativeAngela Kane in her statement to this forum, the increase
in production and the proliferation of fissile material in South Asia, especially Pakistan, is of
concern. We call on states of the region to declare a moratorium on the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
The efficacy and durability of the NPT is predicated on its integrity. Cases of non-compliance
that are not addressed with timely and meaningful action negatively affect the fabric of the
Treaty. States Parties must consider these cases of non-compIiance with safeguards obligations
and determine how the 2015 RevCon will address them.
Thank you.

