Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, let me express Canada's appreciation that you have taken on the responsibility as Chair of Main Committee ii. Your experience, knowledge and guidance will greatly assist us in our work. You can be assured of Canada's full support as we work in a constructive and cooperative manner to address the many important issues before this Committee.
This year Canada is proud to have assumed the G8 Presidency. G8 Foreign Ministers gathered just over a month ago in Gatineau and released a statement on nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses. This statement was drafted explicitly as a contribution to the work of this Review Conference. Accordingly, it addresses many issues specifically related to the mandate of this Committee. I commend this document to you and to all participants in the Committee as input to inform our discussions.
Canada was also an active participant in consultations undertaken in Vienna by an informal group known as the G10 or the Vienna Group of 10. This group has traditionally worked to facilitate discussion at NPT Review Conferences by crafting language for possible inclusion in the Conference's final document. The results of these consultations have been submitted to the Conference and can be found in Working Papers 15 to 21. These Working Papers also cover a wide range of issues directly related to the work of this Committee and I am certain that they will make a valuable contribution to the Committee's work.
Before providing comments on some of the issues that we will discuss in this Committee, I would like to make two general observations. First, it is important to note that Review Conferences provide an opportunity not only to look backwards over the last 5 years but also to look forward - to chart a course of action to maintain the authority and the effectiveness of the Treaty. Secondly, while this Committee is primarily focused on issues relevant to the non-proliferation pillar of the Treaty, there is an intrinsic link between all 3 pillars. For Canada, it is important that this Conference strives to make progress in each pillar.
Let me now turn to a few of the issues of particular significance to Canada.
Mr. Chairman, for Canada it is imperative that the Conference continues to recognize and support the unique role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying States' compliance with their obligations under Article III. In Canada's view, there are two mutually reinforcing elements to this task. First, States Party must conclude and bring into force a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency. While the vast majority of States Party have met this obligation, 21 States Party have still not done so. The Conference must address this deficiency by urging those States Party to meet their obligations under Article III. Second, States Party must fully comply with the obligations arising from the safeguards agreements. Non-compliance is a challenge to the
Treaty and as such is a challenge to all of us. Thus, the Conference must reaffirm the fundamental importance of full compliance with Article III.
Pursuant to the comprehensive safeguards agreements required under Article HI, the IAEA is tasked with providing assurances that all nuclear material in a State is in peaceful activities. The IAEA has told us for several years now that its ability to detect undeclared nuclear material and activities is limited for a State without an additional protocol. Over 50% of the Treaty's States Party have a comprehensive safeguards agreement and an additional protocol in force. The Conference should affirm that this is the verification standard necessary to provide credible assurance that a State is in compliance with its peaceful use commitments under the Treaty. We should do this not simply because this standard is being implemented in the majority of States Party but because we need to have the highest level of confidence in the annual safeguards conclusions drawn by the IAEA. It must be stressed that our confidence in compliance is the foundation of the Treaty and allows cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to flourish. In the same light, the Conference should also support the continued evolution of IAEA safeguards to a more information-driven system - one in which evaluation and implementation is based upon all relevant information about a State .
Canada shares the view expressed in UN Security Council Resolution 1887 that nuclear export controls are a legitimate, necessary and desirable means of implementing States Party obligations under Article III. Effective national export controls are also mandated by UN Security Council Resolutions 1540, 1673 and 1810. The Conference should recognize the importance of effective national export control systems and should encourage States Party that have such systems to provide assistance to those that require it.
Mr. Chairman, multilateral^ agreed guidance on what constitutes effective export control measures is the basis for national systems for many States Party. The Conference should recognize the contribution of these efforts in general and urge all States Party to consider this guidance in implementing their national systems. In particular, Canada urges the Conference to encourage all States Party to adopt the Understandings of the Zangger Committee as a means of meeting their obligations under the Treaty.
The physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities is another integral element of a successful non-proliferation regime. Accordingly, the Conference should highlight the importance of maintaining effective physical protection measures on such material and facilities. In this regard, the Conference should welcome the Nuclear Security Summit held recently in Washington to discuss ways in which the international community can strengthen its efforts to enhance the physical protection of nuclear materials and combat the illicit trafficking of these materials in order to prevent nuclear terrorism. Furthermore, Canada believes that the Conference should support the work of
the IAEA in assisting States' efforts to prevent the illicit trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive material, by underscoring the importance of regular contributions to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund. The Conference should also urge ail States Party to ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials.
Mr. Chairman, throughout the past year, Canada has discussed proposals on institutional reform with a cross-regional group of 30 States in Geneva. With the help of these States, Canada refined these proposals into a series of draft decisions set out in Working Paper 4 which we would like the Conference to consider. None of these proposed decisions would require an amendment of the Treaty nor would they affect the existing responsibilities and relationships between the NPT and the United Nations Security Council or the IAEA. Furthermore, all of the proposals are 'modular' to the extent that each is presented individually for consideration and not as a package. I note that Working Paper 4 is co-sponsored by 17 countries.
Finally Mr. Chairman, regional issues and tensions provide particular challenges to the Treaty. Canada supports the establishment of a subsidiary body of this Committee to address these issues. Without prejudice to the work of a subsidiary body, it is Canada's view that the Conference should note the contribution of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones to the reinforcement and stability of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Canada strongly supports the expansion of such zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States involved. In particular, Canada supports the creation of a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery in the Middle East.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



