
The integrity of the NPT in the future will depend on the continued evolution of the IAEA safeguards system, international standards set for export controls and transfers of equipment and technology, physical protection of nuclear material and global threat reduction, In our view, the integrity of the NPT will also be significantly bolstered through institutional reforms that strengthen the review process. To that end, Canada has tabled a Working Paper, available now as NPT/CONF/2010/PC.III/WP.8, containing concrete proposals for annual general conferences of States Parties and for the establishment of a standing bureau and dedicated support unit. We look forward to discussing these proposals further with delegations and will provide additional details in a subsequent statement.
While Canada applauds the efforts of states to bring Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements into force, we continue to be concerned that 27 states have yet to do so and that Additional Protocols are only in force in 90 states. This Preparatory Committee should call on all countries that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and implement a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and an Additional Protocol, and recognize that together these measures represent the verification standard under Article III of the Treaty.
Canada reiterates the important role that the UN Security Council must continue to play in reinforcing the integrity and credibility of the NPT regime. In accordance with its Statute, the IAEA must continue to have access to the Security Council, particularly in cases of non-compliance. This Preparatory Committee should recommend that States Parties endorse at next year's Review Conference the proposal to regularly invite the IAEA Director General to brief the Council on the status of safeguards and other verification processes.
Concerning export controls, no State Party should transfer any nuclear-related items to any recipient whatsoever unless the recipient country is in full compliance with its safeguards obligations. States Parties should require that transfers only take place if the recipient State has in place an effective system of nuclear security, adequate physical protection, measures to combat illicit trafficking, and effective controls on retransfers. Canada believes that multilateral export control regimes such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee play a particularly valuable role in facilitating legitimate nuclear trade among States while respecting non-proliferation commitments.
Transfers of proliferation-sensitive nuclear equipment and technology used for enrichment and reprocessing must continue to receive special attention. Canada remains of the view that the development of a set of stringent internationally-agreed criteria for such transfers is the best approach.
Canada underlines the importance of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and welcomes the 2005 adoption of an important amendment which substantially strengthened the Convention. This Preparatory Committee should recommend that all States Party sign, ratify and implement both the CPPNM and its
amendment, and apply, as appropriate, other international physical protection standards and instruments.
Mr. Chair,
Canada encourages all States Parties to act in accordance with the IAEA's Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources and its accompanying Guidance on the Import and Export of Radioactive Sources. Canada is implementing both and, in accordance with these standards, has recently taken a number of other steps to substantially strengthen controls on radiological sources. We also encourage States to be proactive in cooperative threat reduction, and acknowledge the important contribution of the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction to which Canada has committed up to $ 1 billion over ten years.
Canada strongly supports the contribution that the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones add to regional and global security. We note the announcement of the entry into force of the Central Asian Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and appreciate that the Treaty creating the zone requires the Member States to have both an IAEA Safeguards Agreement as well as an Additional Protocol. In particular, Canada vigorously supports the establishment of a NWFZ in the Middle East, and encourages the IAEA to continue to facilitate progress towards this goal.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
