Statement by Chinese Delegation
on Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
(Geneva, April 26, 2013)
Mr. Chairman,
The current international security environment is complicated and
undergoing fundamental changes. Nuclear proliferation is still prominent
which demands the international community to continue to adopt
effective measures to maintain and reinforce the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, so as to eliminate the risk of nuclear
proliferation.
As the cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime, the NPT has played a significant role in preventing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and maintaining world peace and
security. China is ready to work with the international community to
promote the 2015 NPT Review Conference to achieve positive progress
in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons has complex root causes.
Efforts should be made in the following aspects as a holistic approach
which addresses both the symptoms and the root causes to achieve proper
solutions.
Firstly, a favorable international security environment should be
fostered, so as to fundamentally eliminate the incentives for nuclear
proliferation. The legitimate and reasonable security concerns of all states
should be respected and accommodated. No country should seek its own
security at the expense of others. Efforts should be made to build a safer
world for all through mutually-beneficial and win-win cooperation,
creating conditions for realizing the objective of nuclear
1

non-proliferation.
Secondly, the international and regional non-proliferation issues
should be resolved through dialogues and negotiations. Any international
efforts in this regard should not deviate from the fundamental goal of
maintaining and promoting international and regional peace and stability.
All relevant parties should overcome their differences and suspicions
through dialogues on the bases of equality and mutual respect, build
mutual trust and normalize their relations, contributing to the objective of
non-proliferation.
Thirdly, the authority and effectiveness of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime should be maintained and enhanced. The
practices of double standards must be abandoned to ensure the
impartiality and non-discrimination of international non-proliferation
regime and the comprehensive, faithful and balanced implementation of
all obligations under the NPT. It is necessary to strengthen the safeguards
function of the IAEA and promote the universality of the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement and its Additional Protocol. The export control
system and international cooperation in this regard should be further
improved.
Fourthly, the relation between non-proliferation and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy should be addressed properly. Each country’s right to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be guaranteed. At the same time,
all countries should comply strictly with the responsibilities and
obligations set out by the NPT, and should not take peaceful uses of
nuclear energy as an excuse for proliferation activities.
Mr. Chairman,
China firmly opposes any forms of nuclear proliferation. China fulfills
its international non-proliferation obligations in a serious manner. China
has joined all relevant international treaties and mechanisms in the
nuclear field, and strictly implemented the relevant resolutions adopted
by the UN Security Council. China has established comprehensive
nuclear export control laws and regulations and taken strict measures to
2

ensure their effective implementation.
China always takes a highly responsible attitude on nuclear
non-proliferation issues. China has actively participated in international
non-proliferation process and has made relentless efforts to promote
resolution of relevant regional nuclear issues.
China always believes that the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula
should be settled through dialogue by peaceful means, calls for all parties
to pursue dialogues and consultations and to address the nuclear issue on
the Peninsula under the framework of Six-Party Talks. China is always
committed to the realization of de-nuclearization of the Peninsula and the
peace and stability in the Peninsula and Northeast Asia. We will continue
to make unremitting efforts in this regard.
On the Iranian nuclear issue, China has played a constructive role in
promoting the process of dialogue, and always advocates peaceful
resolution of the issue through dialogues and negotiations. China
welcomes the dialogue between P5+1 and Iran. We appeal to all relevant
parties to step up diplomatic efforts, strengthen mutual trust, promote
negotiation to early progress, and seek a comprehensive, long-term and
appropriate solution in a step-by-step manner.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons which elaborates China’s relevant
positions. We hope the elements contained therein will be reflected in the
report of this PrepCom.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

3

