Statement by the Chinese Delegation on the Issue of
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the First
Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 20 15 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(May 2012, Vienna)

Mr.Chairman,
As the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation regime,
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has
played an important role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and maintaining international peace and security. Currently, it
is necessary for the international community to take effective measures
to maintain and strengthen the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime and eliminate the risks of proliferation of nuclear weapons. The
Chinese delegation hopes that this round of review process will achieve
positive progress in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons is caused by complex factors.
To effectively prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons requires joint
actions by all parties. Efforts should be made in the following aspects as
a holistic approach which addresses both the symptoms and the root
causes.
--The proliferation of nuclear weapons is interrelated with the
international and regional security environment. All countries should
make efforts in fostering an international security environment of
cooperation and trust, respect the security concerns of each other, and
advance collective security so as to eliminate the incentives for seeking

nuclear weapons. To seek one's own superior security at the expense of
others' security is unacceptable.
--The authority, effectiveness and universality of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime should be maintained and enhanced
practices of double standards must be discarded. Comprehensive,
faithful and balanced compliance with all the obligation of the NPT
should be guaranteed. It is necessary to strengthen the safeguards
function of the IAEA and promote the universality of the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement and its Additional Protocol. All states should
strictly fulfill their non-proliferation obligations, strengthen their export
control system and facilitate international cooperation in this regard.
--Regional nuclear issues should be addressed in a peaceful manner
through dialogue and negotiations. Either resorting to sanctions or force
or taking non-proliferation as an excuse for other purposes is not
conducive to the settlenerit of these problems. Efforts shcluld be made to
encourage the countries concerned to strengthen dialogue, build trust
and realize the normalization of their relations so as to pave the way for
the solution of relevant non-proliferation issues.
--The relation between non-proliferation and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy should be developed in a balanced manner.
Non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are mutually
reinforcing rather than contradictory. The guarantee of each country's
right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy is helpful for the achievement of
the non-proliferation purpose. At the same time, all the countries should
comply strictly with the obligations set out by the NPT, and should not
take peaceful uses of nuclear energy as an excuse for proliferation
activities.
Mr. Chairman,
China firmly opposes any form of nuclear proliferation. China has
fulfilled its international non-proliferation obligations in a serious
manner. China has joined all relevant international treaties and

mechanisms in the nuclear area, established a comprehensive nuclear
export laws and regulations system and taken effective measures to
enforce these laws and regulations.
Meanwhile, for the purpose of safeguarding the international
non-proliferation regime and maintaining world and regional peace and
security, China has participated actively in the international
non-proliferation endeavor and made important efforts to promote the
settlement of nuclear issues in relevant regions.
Regarding the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula, China has
always believes that the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula should be
settled through dialogue and consultation and by peaceful means. This
approach serves the interests of all parties concerned and the
international community as a whole. Facts have shown that the six-party
talks is an effective mechanism to push forward denuclearization of the
Peninsula and to maintain peace and stability there and in whole
Northeast Asia. It is also an important platform for improving relations
among interested parties. Under current circumstances, we believe that
parties concerned should stay calm, exercise restraint and refrain from
doing things that could harm the peace and stability in the Peninsula and
the region. China hopes that the parties concerned adhere to
engagements and dialogues and meet each other half way in order to
create favorable conditions to relaunch the six-party talks without delay.

With the joint efforts of all parties concerned, the EU3+3 and Iran
has resumed dialogues and achieved positive outcome, which begins the
sustained dialogue process. This is of great significance to promoting
gradual diplomatic settlement of the issue. We hope that EU3i-3 and Iran
can be devoted to the main direction of peaceful settlement and increase
mutual understanding based on the principles of step-by-step and
recirocity so as to seek a proper solution to settle the issue in a
comprehensive and long-term manner. China has maintained close
communications with all parties and has made unremitting efforts to

promoting the resumption of dialogues and its positive outcome. China is
willing to work with all parties, actively engage in promoting peace and
talks, and continue to play a constructive role in promoting the peaceful
settlement of Iranian Nuclear issue.
The Chinese delegation submitted a working paper entitled
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons at this session of the Preparatory
Committee. We hope that the elements in this working paper be fully
reflected in the relevant reports of the Preparatory Committee.
Thank you, Mr.Chairman.

