Mr. Chairman,
Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons concerns international peace, security and stability, and it serves the common interests of the international community. As the cornerstone of international nuclear non-proliferation regime, the NPT has all along played an important and irreplaceable role in preventing proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons has its complicated root causes, which is closely related to the international and regional security environment. The international community should commit themselves to improving global and regional security environment and ensuring the
common security of all countries, which is not only important to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons, but also conducive to removing motivations of States to acquire, develop or maintain nuclear weapons.
Therefore, China maintains that following principles should be firmly held in properly handling and addressing nuclear non-proliferation issues:
Firstly, the issue of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be addressed in a comprehensive way and both its symptoms and root causes should be dealt with. Countries should comply with the purpose and principle of the UN Charter and other universally recognized international laws and principles, and pursue a new security concept based on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and cooperation. Countries should also respect each other's security interests, pursue common safety, and create a favorable international security environment so as to create necessary conditions for realization of the goals of nuclear non-proliferation.
Secondly, countries concerned should, on the basis of consultation upon an equal footing and mutual respect, commit themselves to strengthening dialogues, enhancing mutual trust and normalizing their relations. This will greatly contribute to realizing the goal of non-proliferation of nuciear weapons and maintaining and promoting peace and stability.
Thirdly, international and regional non-proliferation issues should be addressed through dialogues and negotiations. Any relevant international efforts should not deviate from the fundamental goal of maintaining and promoting international and regional peace and stability. Sanctions or even use of force cannot solve the issues completely. It is not realistic to rely solely on the Security Council to solve the issues. Diplomatic efforts beyond the Security Council are equally important, and in most cases more effective.
Fourthly, the fair, rational and non-discriminatory nature of international nuclear non-proliferation regime should be ensured, the practice of double standards should be discarded, and the relationship between non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy should be handled in
a balanced way. The international community should take effective measures to prevent any country from engaging in non-proliferation activities with the excuse of using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, while the legitimate rights of peaceful use of nuclear energy should be safeguarded as well.
Fifthly, the international nuclear non-proliferation regime should be earnestly maintained and enhanced. The international community should advance with the times and seek a fair, reasonable and effective way to enhance the nuclear non-proliferation regime through extensive consultations. Under current situation, it is worth our serious consideration on such measures as, enhancing IAEA's role in safeguard, promoting the universality of the Additional Protocol, and improving each country's non-proliferation and export control legislation and law enforcement.
Mr. Chairman,
As a permanent member of the UN Security Council and a member of the international community, China has carried out unremitting efforts aimed at peacefully resolving relevant regional nuclear issues.
On the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue, China has committed itself to the realization of the denuclearization of the peninsula, safeguarding peace and stability on the peninsula and in Northeast Asia. China pursues peaceful settlement of the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue through dialogues and consultation. With the joint efforts of parties concerned, the Six-Party Talks is making gradual and positive progress. It has been proved that Six-Party Talks is an effective mechanism in settling the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue. China hopes parties concerned faithfully implement their commitment in the Joint Statement of 19 September 2005 and the Initial Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statement and push forward the process of the denuclearization of the Peninsula.
On Iranian nuclear issue, proceeding from maintaining international non-proliferation regime and promoting peace and stability in the Middle
East, China advocates peaceful resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue through diplomatic efforts and negotiations. Therefore, China vigorously takes part in relevant international efforts and encourages parties concerned to seek for a long-term, comprehensive and appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear issue through negotiations. China will continue as always to promote peace talks and play a constructive role in solving the Iranian nuclear issue in a proper way.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese Delegation has submitted a working paper on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and hopes the elements contained therein will be fully reflected.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.