Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic
to the United Nations Office
and other International Organizations
at Geneva

1 7 , chemin Louis-Dunant
Ca se postale 109
1 202 Genève 20
t el.:+41(0)22 910 3810, fax: +41(0)22 740 3662
e-m ail: mission.geneva@embassy.mzv.cz
w ww.mzv.cz/geneva

STATEMENT BY H.E. Ms. KATEŘINA SEQUENSOVÁ
AMBASSADOR, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
CZECH REPUBLIC TO THE UN OFFICE AND OTHER
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AT GENEVA

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

Cluster II

Mr Chairman,
Since this is the first time I am taking the floor, I would like to congratulate you on assuming
the important task as Chair and assure you of Czech Republic´s full support and cooperation
in our collective efforts to strengthen the NPT. The Czech Republic fully associates itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
The current review cycle offers a unique opportunity for all State Parties to renew and
intensify their commitment to the NPT and look for further ways and means to strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament architecture. The Czech Republic seeks a
reasonable and balanced outcome of the 2015 Review Conference that would move us closer
to the ultimate goals of the treaty. The nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear
energy are for us as important as the total removal of nuclear weapons, thus all three pillars of
the NPT should be paid the same attention.
In this regard, the Czech Republic puts emphasis especially on the IAEA´s Safeguards
system. Our long-term effort is the global implementation of the Additional protocol and in
this way further strengthening of the mutual trust in the international non-proliferation
regime.
The Czech Republic considers the nuclear verification mechanisms to be a key component of
the Safeguards system and therefore we decided in 2012 to support the Agency´s analytical
capabilities through voluntary contribution of 50 thousand Euro. In our view, accurate and
timely analysis of safeguards samples is essential for safeguards verification activities of the
Agency inspectors while accomplishing their tasks in this respect.
Besides the safeguards activities, it is the nuclear security that The Czech Republic considers
to be a crucial priority. Therefore, we have also contributed to the Nuclear Security Fund
almost 500 000 USD. The Czech Republic also aligns itself fully with the new priorities set
out by the Agency in the security area, particularly with those regarding the outreach and
information exchange through databases, conferences, workshops and fellowships. In this
respect, we would especially welcome greater convergence of the Illicit Trafficking Database
and other databases and creation of a universal informative platform, as advised in the
Nuclear Security Plan for 2010 to 2013.
As you may know the Czech Republic attended both meetings of the Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington and in Seoul. We appreciate adding the radiological security and the
nuclear security-safety topics to the summit agenda, as they bring the nuclear security issues
and the nuclear safety issues closer together. One of the most important commitments
initiated at the NSS was to generally limit the use of highly enriched uranium (HEU). In this
regard we would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Czech Republic in the
framework of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative in co-operation with the United States

finalized the removal of all highly enriched uranium from its territory and thus has become an
effectively HEU-free country.
The final shipment of 68kg of HEU from the Nuclear Research Institute in Řež to Russia was
completed at the turn of March this year.
Another key component of this commitment is the conversion of the Czech research reactors
from the use of nuclear weapons-usable HEU fuel to low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuel. This
conversion was accomplished last year and all Czech research and training reactors are now
fully converted and operating with LEU fuel.
Mr. Chairman,
To ensure a successful outcome of the 2015 Review Conference and to fulfill the Action Plan
agreed in 2010, it is necessary for all State Parties to contribute to these ends. The Czech
Republic stands ready to help other countries with the implementation of their nonproliferation commitments.
Thank you for your attention.

