CZECH REPUBLIC

Statement by

Mr. Ladislav STEINHUBEL
First Secretary of the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic
to the UN

at

Third session of the Preparatory Committee to the NPT
Cluster II

New York, 1 May 2014

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates!
1. Since I am taking the floor for the first time, allow me to express my delegation's sincere
congratulations to you on your election as the Chairman of this Preparatory Committee
meeting, as well as to the members of the bureau. I am confident that under your able
leadership this Committee will be a successful session. You can be confident of our
cooperation and support.
The Czech Republic is fully aligned with the statement delivered by the European Union. I
would like to add the following remarks in my national capacity.
2. As a non-nuclear-weapon State Party, the Czech Republic will continue to fulfil its
obligations under the NPT and remain committed to the full implementation of its 2010
Action Plan.
3. We support the right of States Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes but in full
conformity with their non-proliferation obligations. We are of the view that noncompliance
should be challenged and states should be held responsible and accountable for their
violations. Therefore, it is of utmost importance for all States to take concentrated and
resolute action to ensure strict compliance with their non-proliferation obligations and
respond quickly and effectively to non-compliance.
4. In this regard, we would like to point out that any misuse of Article X could lead to further
proliferation and as such should be reported to the UN Security Council. That is why we
strictly insist on the return or dismantlement of all nuclear materials, technology and
equipment provided by supplier states if requested in case of withdrawal from the Treaty.
Moreover, all remaining items should be subject to the IAEA safeguards and serve peaceful
uses only.
5. We have to pursue responsible peaceful uses to ensure high standard of safety and security
measures and to avoid an increased risk of proliferation. In our view, the IAEA nuclear
security program is an effective tool for addressing the threat of acquisition of nuclear
materials or weapons by terrorists. This programme must be supported not only financially
but also through a universal implementation of both legally binding instruments and
recommended security and physical protection guidelines and measures.
6. In order to optimize the IAEA's verification activities, the recognition of a new verification
standard has been long time overdue. The Czech Republic has been a continuous supporter of
establishing the Additional Protocol as the core standard of the verification process and the
verification activities of the Agency as the key measure to ensure the peaceful nature of the
nuclear programme. Without it the IAEA is unable to provide credible assurance of the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities anywhere. We are proud that the IAEA
has been able to provide such a declaration on the Czech Republic when the Additional
Protocol entered into force for our country. Let me reiterate the call for universal recognition
of the Additional Protocol as the core verification standard with a deterrent effect on nuclear
proliferation.
Mr Chairman,

7. The Czech Republic strongly believes that all cases of non-compliance must be reported as
it is required by the IAEA Statute to the Security Council and the General Assembly of the
United Nations. In our view, there are a few cases that have been undermining the global nonproliferation system and international security for several years.

8. It is the DPRK that threatens both the regional and international security environment and
jeopardises the authority ofthe Security Council, impedes functions of the IAEA and does not
honour the commitments of the September 2005 Joint Statement to abandon all its nuclear
weapons. The only way for a peaceful solution to the DPRK nuclear issue is the resumption of
the Six Party Talks in the framework of which DPRK's compliance with its obligations and
commitments should be ensured. That is why it is necessary for all countries to co-operate
closely in the implementation of the UNSCR 1874 in order to solve this nuclear crisis.
9. It is our belief that the final goal of the activities of the IAEA in the Iranian nuclear issue is
to provide credible assurances about the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities
in Iran as well as to explain all past activities regarding possible military dimensions of the
programme and finally to conclude that all nuclear material in Iran is used only for peaceful
purposes. We note the recent developments including the agreements between Iran and the
IAEA and Iran and E3+3 reached since November last year. Iran must urgently cooperate and
provide all requested information in order to regain international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful character of its programme.

I 0. In regard to the regional issues, we share the opinion that the Middle East deserves a
comprehensive solution, including the elimination of all categories of weapons of mass
destruction and a peace settlement in the region. We appreciate the efforts of the Facilitator
and his team in preparing the Helsinki conference. We understand that the Conference is only
a starting point of a long lasting process that could bring us to a mutually acceptable solution
for all parties in the Middle East region.
11. The Czech Republic is convinced that complex challenges to the non-proliferation regime

must be addressed by all existing instruments in a coordinated manner. In this respect,
transparency and greater responsibility in the transfer of nuclear and nuclear-related items has
an ever-increasing role, as the volume of nuclear trade rises and the nuclear industry becomes
increasingly global. We are therefore proud and honoured to have been entrusted by Nuclear
Suppliers Group's forty-eight Participating Governments to chair this group from June 2013
to June 2014. The completion ofthe review ofNSG control lists in 2013 gives clear evidence
of the capability of the group to remain flexible, keeping pace with security challenges,
advances in technology and market trends.
12. The Czech Republic has always advocated limiting the use of highly enriched uranium
(HEU) due to related risks. By its virtue, it is a first choice nuclear weapon material. In
support of that we have finalized the process of converting our research reactors from highly
enriched to low enriched uranium fuel. We are very proud that we have become a HEU-free
country, thus fulfilling our commitment made at the Nuclear Security Summit in 2012 in
Seoul. The process of repatriation is a very demanding one and requires effective international
cooperation and support of those who are able and willing to do so. The Czech Republic
stands ready to offer its know-how and equipment to those who decide to dispose of their
HEU.
Thank you for your kind attention.
(Check against delivery)

