Statement by the Czech Republic
Cluster II
Second session of the Preparatory Committee to the NPT
Geneva, 23 April - 4 .May 2018

Mr. Chairman,

1. The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the EU statement delivered earlier.
Nevertheless, I would like to point out to severa] issues that are of particular importance to my
country.
2. The Czech Republic commends mutually reinforcing endeavours of the UN bodies as well
as numerous international control regimes and initiatives in the area of non-proliferation.
Thanks to that synergy, the second NPT pillar has been reinforced. However, while there is a
general recognition of undisputable validity of UNSC resolution 1540, so far not all states
abide completely by the relevant UNSC and IAEA resolutions nor do they fully comply with
the NPT commitments.
3. The Czech Republic recognises the right of NPT States Parties to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. This right should not be hampered but, at the same time, it must be
exercised in full conformity with the non-proliferation obligations. Any case of noncompliance should be treated according to established intemational norms and the respective
States should be held responsible and accountable for their violations. We strongly believe
that all cases of non-compliance must be reported, as it is required by the IAEA Statute, to the
Security Council and the General Assembly of the United Nations. We are convinced that the
international community has to seize opportunity and take up courage to rectify those few
cases still undennining the global non-proliferation system and international security.
4. The Czech Republic therefore welcomed concJusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and supported its implementation by a voluntary contribution. According to
our standpoint, the JCPOA together with UNSC resolution 2231 represents a well-suited
product of effective multilateral diplomacy and a unique asset in the area of non-proliferation.
Indeed, it can also serve as a precedent worth repeating should a window of opportunity to
resolve a long-standing proliferation crisis appear. Thus, we are looking forward to a possible
progress in the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
5. In that context, we would like to emphasize a unique nature and irreplaceable role of the
IAEA. Its verification activities in the area of safeguards directly contiibute to deepening of
international confidence and foster credibility of the NPT regime. The Czech Republic
remains fully committed to strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system by actively
participating in the IAEA Member States Support Programme since 2002, namely through
organizing trainings for Agency's safeguards inspectors, developing and testing of new IAEA
containment and surveillance equipment and offering high quality analytical services in the
field of nuclear materials. We also provide our national nuclear facilities for testing of new
safeguards verification methods.
6. The Czech Republic has been a continuous supporter of establishing the Additional
Protocol as the core verification standard and the key measure to ensure the peaceful nature of

a nuclear programme. In our view, the acceptance of the Additional Protocol has a deterrent
effect on nuclear proliferation and enables the Agency to implement the Integrated Safeguards
approach, an optimum combination of all safeguards measures available to the Agency.
7. The Czech Republic participated actively in the Nuclear Security Summit process and
supports its follow-up though the engagement in the Nuclear Security Contact Group.
Through the framework of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative and with the assistance of
the United States, the Czech Republic has successfully repatriated all of its highly enriched
uranium (HEU) and converted al1 of its research reactors to low enriched uraniwn fuel, thus
effectively becoming a HEU-free country and fulfilling one of the main objectives of the NSS
process.
8. We believe that promoting responsibility of all States for securing nuclear and radioactive
materials on their territory and preventing non-state actors from acquiring these materials
remains the utmost priority. We therefore stand convinced that the nuclear security is an
indispensable element complementing peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear
applications, thus an enabler, not a competitor of the IAEA technical cooperation activities.

Thank you for your attention.

