
Mr. Chairman,
International efforts aimed at implementing Treaty committments in the field of nuclear non-proliferation parallel those dedicated to fullfiling commitments on nuclear disarmament, as both goals mutually reinforce the effectiveness of one another. In this context, Egypt believes that all such efforts must be pursued in the multilateral context provided by the Treaty and through the verification activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the sole international body mandated by the Treaty to conduct that function, and as an organization we strongly support for its extrmely important role and exceptional performance.
The comprehensive safeguards system of the IAEA was established to create a balance between the inalienable right of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States (NNWS) to benefit from peaceful applications of nuclear technologies on the one hand, and the prevention of horizontal non-proliferation of nuclear weapons on the other. Indeed, comprehensive safeguards secure the non-diversion of peaceful nuclear activities or material to military nuclear programs.
While the comprehensive safeguards system represents a central pillar in the field of horizantal non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the IAEA has so far an extremely limited role in the prevention of vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, or in effectively verifying nuclear disarmament. The fullfilment of both such aspects of Treaty obligations practically depends on the responsible implementation of disarmament commitments undertaken by Nuclear-Weapon-States (NWS) in an effort that must be combined with parallel work on achieving the universality of the Treaty through the universal application of comprehensive safeguards. Indeed, the universality of the Treaty can only consolidate its effectiveness and ensure that it contributes to the security and stability of its members which will
then not face nuclear threats from within or outside the regime, the main goal for which the Treaty was drafted and more recently, indefinitely extended.
For decades, including since the indefinite extention of the Treaty, the Comprehensive Safeguards System continues to verify, with ever progressing effectiveness, the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes in NNWS, both those operating a full nuclear fuel cycle capability and others operating facilities at less developed levels. Despite this strict control on NNWS, NWS continue to assume having a free hand outside safeguards control, except for what are so far symbolic arrangements. Furthermore, Non-NPT States remain outside the safguards scope except for Limited Safeguards Agreements covering facilities already designed and dedicated to non-military use, while excluding all other facilities established to produce weapons of terror, destabilization and destruction, aimed at threatening the security of NPT States. The case of Israel's unsafeguarded nuclear programme and its negative destabilizing impact on regional security and stability in the Middle East, is one blunt example.
Despite all that, Egypt and other NNWS have remained keen on reiterating their commitments in accordance with the Treaty and subsequent Comprehensive Safeguards commitments while acknowledging their inalienable right to peaceful use of nuclear energy at a time at which energy needs of developing countries soar, stressing even further the crucial importance of that inalienable right, as it becomes more directly associated with legitimate development plans aiming at upgrading economic and social standards of the peoples of these countries.
Mr. Chairman,
The transfer of nuclear technology from developed to developing States remains very limited, and we continue to witness efforts exerted by some who try to redefine the safeguards system in order to limit the national options available to others in the nuclear energy area and to impose unjustified restrictions on the principle or scope of acquisition of NNWS of material and technologies to develop peaceful nuclear programmes. They try to do so through seeking reinterpretations of Article IV of the Treaty. Interpretations that have no relevance to Treaty provisions, and that only bring further division between NPT States and add unncessary challenges to the credibility of the Treaty regime including that of comprehensive safeguards.
Not only has this been the case, but NNWS currenlty face additional pressures aiming at the imposition of more commitments on them in the area of safeguards. Additional commitments that are neither obligatory nor related to the provisions of the Treaty. These efforts undermine and distract from work dedicated to the realization of the universality of the Comprehensive Safeguards System.
Egypt believes that such developments require collective and internsified work by the international community to address the challenges to the non-proliferation regime and to do so through enhancing the IAEA comprehensive safeguards system by strengthening the resolve to uphold its principle and legal foundations and work towards its universality as a priority that preceeds all.
The delegation of Egypt hopes that the current review cycle will succeed in constructively addressing the highlighted issues in order to reiterate the principles and provisions of the Treaty and endorse their proper implementation.
Thank you

