Egypt's Statement
before the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, 30 April - 11 May 2012
"Cluster I1 issues" (Non-Proliferation and Safeguards)

Mr. Chairman,

The Comprehensive safeguards system of the IAEA was established to create a balance
between the inalienable right of Non-Nuclear- Weapon States (NNWS) to benefit from
peaceful applications of nuclear technologies on the one hand, and the prevention of
horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons on the other.

Indeed. comprehensive

safeguards secure the non-diversion of peaceful nuclear activities or material to military
nuclear programs.
IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards constitute the NPT's only verifications mechanism.
Egypt believes that international efforts that aim to implement treaty commitments
concerning nuclear non-proliferation parallel to those efforts directed to fulfilling
commitments in the field of nuclear disarmament must of course be implemented
through the Agency's verification activities, given that it is the sole international agency
with the mandate to pursue this role.

Unfortunately, the IAEA's role while successful in ensuring the non-diversion of nuclear
activities or material to military nuclear programs. it has so far had a limited role in
preventing vertical proliferation, or in verifjiing nuclear disarmament. Furthermore. the
Agency cannot take any possible action concerning verification ingated not party to the
NPT who have not yet entered into Comprehensive Safeguards agreements. Israel's
unsafeguarded nuclear facilities and activities, wh%h continue to have a destabilizing
impact on regional peace and security, as well as undermining international nonproliferation efforts.

Mr Chairman,
Despite this, Egypt has remained firmly committed to honoring its obligations under its
Comprehensive Safeguards agreement, and has remained consistently ever since
entering into those obligations. Therefore, its is surprising when those countries that
honor their commitments are asked to enter into additional verification obligations,
especially in the light of the continued existence of completely unsafeguarded facilities
in the Middle East.

In addition, Egypt remains concerned by efforts to redefine existing obligations. under
Article IV of the Treaty, with an aim to limiting national options available to others in
the nuclear energy field and to impose unjustified restrictions on the principle or scope
of acquisition of NNWS of material and technologies to develop peaceful nuclear
programmes. This reinterpretation of Article IV does not reflect the letter or the spirit of
the NPT and challenges the credibility of the Treaty regime including that of
comprehensive safeguards.
This has especially made clear when NNWS are faced with additional pressures aiming
at the imposition of more commitments on them in the area of safeguards. These
Commitments are neither o b l i g a t o ~nor related to the provisions of the Treaty. These
efforts undermine and distract from work dedicated to the realization of the universality
of the Comprehensive Safeguards System.
Egypt hopes that the current review cycle will succeed in constructively and successfirlly
addressing the aforementioned challenges in order to strengthen the NPT and ensure its
continued ability to deal with them effectively.

