2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Main Committee II

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Janne Taalas
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of Finland
to the United Nations

New York, 5 May 2015

(check against delivery)

Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen
I would like to congratulate you on assuming the important task as Chair of the Main
Committee II and assure you of our full cooperation.
I fully associate myself with the statement made by the European Union and would like to make
some additional points from a national perspective.
Our priorities are also reflected in working papers prepared by the Vienna Group of 10.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear weapon proliferation continues to be a serious concern. The international community
must take appropriate measures in cases of non-compliance in order to preserve the integrity of
the non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the NPT.
The IAEA safeguards play an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. The
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, together with the Additional Protocol, should be
accepted universally as the international verification standard.
Finland supports further implementation of the IAEA safeguards based on the State-Level
Concept. Consistent and universal implementation of the State-Level Concept will further
strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of the IAEA Safeguards System and contribute to
global non-proliferation efforts.
Finland continues to provide extra budgetary support to the IAEA safeguards. Since 2010
Finland has supported the IAEA safeguards with 860 000 euro through the National Safeguards
Support Programme.
In addition, Finland has provided a financial contribution of 400 000 euro for the
implementation of the IAEA monitoring and verification activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran
in relation to the Joint Plan of Action.
All along, Finland has supported a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We are
encouraged by the agreement on the key parameters of a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
This represents a significant step in the process and we look forward to the completion of the
negotiations by the June deadline.

I would like to reiterate our long-standing serious concern about the nuclear programme of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the challenge it poses to the international nonproliferation regime.
Mr Chairman,
Let me now turn to the Finnish nuclear energy programme which is in an active phase with new
nuclear power plants and a final disposal facility for the spent nuclear fuel, under licensing and
construction. In these projects we are implementing Safeguards by Design. This approach brings
the IAEA safeguards to the very early phase of the nuclear facility planning and ensures an
effective safeguards implementation in the new facility.
Mr Chairman,
Finland is strongly committed to strengthening nuclear security. Finland has ratified the 2005
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We encourage all
States to ratify and bring the amendment into force.
Finland has taken actively part in the Nuclear Security Summit process. The three Summits since
2010 have contributed to the visibility of the issue and brought it to the highest political level.
We look forward to the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit, which will be the fourth and probably the
last one in this series of Summits.
We also emphasize the importance and essential responsibility of the IAEA in nuclear security.
We would like to see the Agency's nuclear security functions strengthened. To this end Finland
continues to provide financial and in-kind support to the IAEA Nuclear Security activities. Since
2010 we have contributed 250 000 to the Nuclear Security Fund.
Finland supports Security Council resolution 1540 and is committed to its effective
implementation. Finland has provided assistance to other States through contributions to the
Global Partnership Programme. Since 2010 more than 1,5 million euro to Second Line of
Defense programme under the Nuclear Smuggling Outreach Initiative.
We attach great importance to combating nuclear terrorism and preventing the risk of nuclear
or other radioactive material falling into the hands of terrorists. We will host in June the next
Plenary of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). New partners are warmly
welcome to join this initiative and participate in the Plenary in Helsinki.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

