

CLUSTER 2: NON-PROLIFERATION

Mr. Chairman,
France fully associates itself to the statement delivered by the European Union. I would like
to make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery remains a major
threat to international peace and security. Since the 2015 Review Conference, the DPRK has
carried out two nuclear tests, in flagrant violation of international law and the resolutions of
the United Nations Security Council.
Nuclear proliferation fundamentally undermines the very objective of the NPT. It hinders our
efforts to make concrete progress towards nuclear disarmament which can only be credible if
it takes international security challenges into account. It also impedes access to nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes.

~6~

France's message is simple: it is our collective responsibility to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. There is no room for fatalism on this issue. Accepting
proliferation would mean reneging on the commitments made under this treaty, and
undermining the security of our nations.
1) The first key commitment of all States Parties to the NPT must be to react, firmly and
collectively, to the proliferation crises.
The DPRK’s leadership is developing nuclear and ballistic programmes, thereby threatening
the security of its neighbours and of the region as well as international peace and security.
The DPRK has made significant progress in its nuclear programme and the window of
opportunity to stop the DPRK from acquiring an operational nuclear capability is closing.
This programme, supported by the DPRK’s top leadership, is intrinsically linked to the
dictatorial nature of the regime and the large-scale human rights violations committed within
the country. We must react without delay. The responsibility to act cannot be shifted to others
or be conditioned by the resumption of a diplomatic process that Pyongyang has rejected. We
must fully implement the United Nations Security Council resolutions, in order to dismantle
the North Korean military programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We
also call on North Korea to sign and ratify the CTBT without delay.
The nuclear and ballistic threat of the DPRK constitutes a serious threat to the international
non-proliferation regime, of which the NPT remains the cornerstone. In this context, France
and the Republic of Korea have taken the initiative to submit a joint declaration as a
Conference document of this Preparatory Committee. This declaration is open to the cosponsorship of all States Parties to the NPT, without prejudice to other relevant processes. We
hope that by supporting this declaration, the States Parties to the NPT will affirm their
commitment to the integrity of the non-proliferation regime.
France welcomes the entry into force of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on
16 January 2016. This agreement shows that the determination of the international community
can contribute to finding appropriate diplomatic and peaceful solutions to proliferation crises.
This agreement requires transparency and close monitoring of the implementation of its
provisions. Although no violations were reported by the IAEA in its latest report published in
February, we must continue to ensure that Iran rigorously abides by all of its commitments for
the duration of the agreement. Furthermore, France remains very concerned by the
continuation of the Iranian ballistic missile programme, which is destabilizing for the region,
runs against the objective of restoring confidence and harms the effectiveness of the process
which has been engaged to lift sanctions.
We once again call for clarification of Syria’s nuclear activities. We will continue to provide
our full support to the IAEA in this regard. The current situation within the country and the
Syrian regime's choice to use weapons of mass destruction, particularly against civilians, are
also of particular concern to my country.

~7~

Mr. Chairman,
2) Our second commitment should be to prevent future proliferation crises by using all
available instruments.
We must strengthen the international export control regimes for the most sensitive nuclear
and ballistic goods and technologies.
We also expect every State Party to implement a rigorous export control system and to punish
violations, commensurate with the threat represented by proliferation.
It is necessary to draw conclusions from the past and ensure that the most sensitive programs,
in particular the development of enrichment and reprocessing programs, are justified by a
demonstrated economic and industrial need.
We must also meet the challenge of evolving proliferation trends of tangible and intangible
goods including attempts to acquire the most sensitive knowledge and know-how. This
requires States to be vigilant and adapt to these new forms of proliferation.
We must assume our responsibility collectively through strengthened and practical action to
prevent proliferation through the development of cooperation between States.
We must pay particular attention to preventing non-state actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, as provided by United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540, recently
reaffirmed and strengthened by Resolution 2325 with the support of France. The extensive
review in 2016 highlighted the relevance of this issue and we call upon all States to
implement these resolutions faithfully.

Mr. Chairman,
3) A third key commitment must aim to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime
For over 60 years now, the IAEA has played a fundamental role in the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. Its work is recognized and we welcome the re-election of its
Director General, Mr. Yukiya Amano. We must preserve its independence and support its
work through a universal and effective implementation of the IAEA safeguards system.

~8~

To meet the objectives of Article III of the NPT, the combined implementation of a
comprehensive safeguards agreement and an additional protocol constitute the verification
standard. The universal implementation of the Additional Protocol remains a priority. A Statelevel approach will significantly help to strengthen the safeguards system.
We must also deter violations of the Agency’s safeguards more effectively. This would
require the State in breach of its non-proliferation obligation to bear the consequences,
including the suspension of civilian nuclear cooperation projects.


France hopes that this NPT review cycle will help reaffirm the strong commitment of all
States Parties to preventing nuclear proliferation which poses a genuine threat to our
collective security.
Thank you for your attention./.

