Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Review Conference
(Geneva, 22 April - 03 May 2013)
Statement by Mr Jean-Hugues Simon-Michel
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of France
to the Conference on Disarmament
Head of the French Delegation

(Geneva, 26thapril2013)

Mr. Chairman,
France fully agrees with the statement made on behalf of the European Union on this chapter.

I would like to add a few items from a national standpoint to this statement.
Mr. Chairman,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery is a major threat to
international security and peace; it is also a threat to affected regions which must be resolutely
opposed.
All the goals which we are pursuing as part of the Treaty are threatened by the severe
proliferation crises which we are currently facing: non-proliferation, disarmament, the
promotion of civil nuclear energy, the creation of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East.
It is therefore especially important that the international community demonstrates its capacity
to act quickly and decisively in response to these challenges, as many countries have
confirmed their desire to have access to nuclear energy to meet fast-growing energy needs.
Nuclear proliferation is also likely to slow down efforts at nuclear disarmament, which we all
aspire to.
The fight against proliferation is therefore essential for our collective security. It must be led
on three fronts: providing a firm response to proliferation crises; strengtheningthe
international nuclear non-proliferation system; stepping up concrete efforts to prevent and
curb proliferation.
The Iranian crisis, first of all. For too many years now, Iran has pursued an enrichment
programme without credible civilian purposes, in violation of the resolutions by the United
Nations Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors. As indicated in the latest IAEA
reports, the situation on the ground continues to deteriorate: enrichment activities have been
stepped up, in particular to 20% on the Fordoo site, which was kept hidden from the
international community for some time; the installation of the first new-generation centrifuges
at Natanz; continued activities linked to heavy water; a refusal to cooperate to clarify
outstanding issues linked to the possible military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear
programme, highlighted in the annex of the IAEA report of November 2011.

France remains determined to find a long-term diplomatic solution. Along with our partners in
the group of Six, we once again met with the Iranian authorities in Almaty at the end of
February and the start of April. New proposals were made to Iran, which unfortunately it was
not prepared to accept. The considerable gap between the stances of the group of the Six and
Iran meant another meeting could not be organized. Once again, we call on Iran to take
immediate and concrete action to establish trust and allow more time to find a long-term
diplomatic solution based on the full implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
For the North Korean crisis, the situation remains extremely worrying. North Korea is
continuing to act in violation of its international obligations: after the launch of a long-range
rocket on 12 December 2012, it conducted a third nuclear test on 12 February 2013. These
serious actions were unanimously condemned by the international community, in particular
with the adoption of resolutions 2087 and 2094 by the United Nations Security Council. The
recent threatening declarations from Pyongyang, including those relating to the restart of their
nuclear complex at the Yongbyon site and its uranium enrichment programme, discovered in
November 2010, have only increased our worries concerning the North Korean nuclear
programme. This attitude is unacceptable: it constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security, and a major challenge for the international non-proliferation regime. The time
has come for this country to return to the road to cooperation and full compliance with the law
by conducting the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of its nuclear programme,
as required by resolutions 1695,1718, 1874,2087 and 2094 of the United Nations Security
Council. Pyongyang must irnmediately allow IAEA inspectors to return to the country,
providing them with access to all nuclear facilities, cease all proliferating activity and abstain
from any further action which could increase the tensions in the region.

Finally, regarding Syria, further to the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors
in June 2011, based on the IAEA report, France continues to call for Syria to shed light
on its past and present nuclear activities, while taking into account the development of
the political situation in Syria. We continue to fully support the Director-General of the
IAEA in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA holds an essential role within the international non-proliferation regime, and in
order to strengthen this, as a priority we must support the efforts of the Agency so that its
safeguards system remains fully effective and credible.
To achieve this, we must call for the universal application and strengthening of the IAEA
safeguards system.
In order to fulfil the goals of article III.1 of the NPT, France believes that the verification
standard should see the combined implementation of a comprehensive safeguards
agreement and an additional protocol. The universal application of these two legal
instruments therefore remains a priority.
Under the particularly restricted current economic and financial conditions, our efforts must
above all focus on strengthening the authority of the Agency, with constant competence,
through a better use of existing means. In particular, we must encourage the IAEA to go on
with the evolution of the safeguards implementation towards the objective use of all
relevant sources of information, enabling the most accurate conclusions possible on each
State.

Furthermore, we encourage IAEA Member States to implement the full consequences in
cases where a country has been declared to be non-compliant with its international
obligations in terms of non-proliferation: suspension of access to the Agency's programme
of technical cooperation and assistance in the relevant areas, reaffirmation of the role of the
United Nations Security Council, implementation by the State at fault of voluntary
transparency measures in order to restore the trust of the international community as soon as
possible.
France will continue to help strengthen the resources of the IAEA, in particular human and
technical resources, through the provision of skills and expertise as part of its National
Safeguards Support Programme.
Mr. Chairman,
Past investigations by the IAEA have uncovered the existence of a vast international network
trafficking sensitive technology, which has not been fully exposed.
The implementation of rigorous and universal control of exports of the most sensitive nuclear
technologies, equipment and materials is a condition essential to the development of the
nuclear trade.
The Zangger committee must continue its work to implement universal principles for export
controls. Furthermore, France is working within the Nuclear Suppliers Group to ensure export
control rules are consistent with the other obligations of the Treaty.
Finally, the fight against proliferation requires us to step up concrete efforts to prevent and
curb this threat. We must better control exports, supervise access to the most sensitive
training, curb proliferating trafficking, punish proliferating activities and cut out their
financing. We must also strive to better implement resolution 1540, both to strengthen our
national systems and to provide countries with the support they need to do so.
To finish, I would like to mention the persistent concerns of the international community
concerning the risks of proliferation which could result from withdrawal from the Treaty.
Let us be clear. Withdrawal from the Treaty is a sovereign right, which we do not call into
question. However, this right cannot be exercised under just any conditions, and to guarantee
the integrity of the Treaty, and the long-term nature of our work to fight nuclear proliferation,
we must prevent abuses of this right. I will have the opportunity to come back to this issue
later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

