•I

Permanent Mission
of Germany
to the United Nations
New York

Statement by

Ambassador Michael Biontino
Permanent Representative of Germany to the Conference
on Disarmament

May, 4th, 2015

Mr President,

I align myself with the Statement by the EU and with the NPDI
positions regarding the second pillar of the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.

A rock-solid non-proliferation regime is one of the crucial
preconditions for our shared goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons.
This Conference should thus acknowledge progress achieved
in connection with non-proliferation crises.

Regarding the Iranian nuclear programme, the Conference
should take note of the substantial progress achieved during
the review cycle. It goes without saying that Germany, as a
member of the E3+3, welcomes the agreement between the
E3+3 and Iran on parameters for a Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action reached on 2 April in Lausanne. Between now and 30
June this needs to be crafted into a final text for a Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. A lot of work still lies ahead of
us.

But it is well worth the effort, for such a Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action would dispel the international community's
concerns regarding the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme and ensure that Iran does not
acquire nuclear weapons. Let me underline in this context the
importance of the continued effective implementation of the
2013 Joint Plan of Action by the E3/EU+3 and Iran and the
essential role played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in verifying the nuclear-related measures. We reaffirm
our strong support for the IAEA's ongoing efforts to verify the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. At the
same time we commend those states which contributed
financially to the IAEA's crucial monitoring and verification work
in Iran.

Unfortunately, there is little progress to report with regard to the
Syrian case of non-compliance. Germany deplores Syria's
ongoing non-compliance with its nuclear safeguards obligations.
The Conference should call on Syria to cooperate fully with the
IAEA by providing access to the information, documentation,
sites, material and personnel in Syria that the Agency has
requested.

Regarding North Korea, the Conference should again condemn
in the strongest possible terms North Korea's ongoing nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes and its aggressive nuclear
messaging. This includes the restart of the SMWe plutoniumproduction reactor, the operation and expansion of the uraniumenrichment facility, and the activities at the light-water reactor at
Yongbyon, as well as ballistic missile launches. North Korea
must refrain from further nuclear testing, immediately cease all
nuclear activities and launches using ballistic missile technology,
and abandon all nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner
as required by the relevant UN Security Council resolutions.
The Conference should urge North Korea to take concrete
steps to honour its commitments under the 2005 Joint
Statement of the Six-Party Talks and to come into full
compliance with its non-proliferation obligations.

Ladies and gentlemen,
It almost goes without saying that a robust nuclear nonproliferation system depends on the IAEA's safeguards system
and its effective implementation. The IAEA must have adequate
resources and political support to fulfil its safeguards mandates.
The Conference should promote an IAEA Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement together with an Additional Protocol as
the international verification standard, which should be taken
into consideration during decisions on supplying nuclear fuel,
equipment or technology. The Conference should call upon all
States which have not yet done so to sign and bring into force
an Additional Protocol and, where relevant, adopt the modified
Small Quantities Protocols.
Member State's Safeguards Support Programmes aim at
supporting the IAEA's safeguards mission and include not only
development of equipment and procedures, but also
development of safeguards approaches, training of Agency
inspectors, development of safeguards evaluation methods and
the appointment of cost-free experts to the IAEA. Germany is
proud to have supported the IAEA within the framework of the
German safeguards support programme with an estimated
voluntary contribution of 1.32 million euros in 2014.

The Conference should also lend support to the goal of
strengthening export control regimes, which are an essential
and complementary part of the international non-proliferation
system. Therefore, States Parties should be encouraged to
adhere to the multilaterally negotiated and agreed guidelines
and best practices of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and Zangger
Committee in developing their domestic export control systems.

Ladies and gentlemen,
In our turbulent times, the risks and challenges emanating from
terrorism, the proliferation of WMD and regional conflicts add up
to a dangerous combination which needs to be addressed with
resolve. We must be aware of the challenges of maintaining a
sufficient level of nuclear security. The 2010 Action Plan
contains important recommendations in that regard. In
Germany's view, this Conference should take stock of progress
achieved on this important issue and encourage further
progress. Undoubtedly, there has been progress in the field of
nuclear security during the last couple of years, not only in
substance, but also in raising awareness in our civil societies.

The series of Nuclear Security Summits has played an
important role in that respect. Maintaining nuclear security is a
complex task under peaceful and stable conditions - and a
serious challenge under crisis conditions. Germany has
supported nuclear security projects in other countries,
particularly within the framework of the Global Partnership, but
also by supporting IAEA activities in the field of nuclear security.
Much has been achieved in terms of structures, know-how and
standards. It is now up to the international community and to the
relevant organisations and initiatives to make sure that these
achievements are put into practice. This Conference should
send a strong signal to this end. It should underline the
importance of an effective and sustainable international nuclear
security architecture which strengthens cooperation between
the various stakeholders in making progress towards our
shared vision of a world without nuclear threats.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Last but not least, a few comments on the extremely important
regional issue to be discussed in this main Committee: the
question of a zone free of nuclear weapons, as well as other
WMD and their means of delivery in the Middle East. Germany
remains committed to the objective of a Middle East free of
WMD and their means of delivery and stands by the pertinent
decisions taken in the context of the NPT. Germany commends
the ongoing efforts of the Facilitator and co-sponsors of the
1995 Resolution (the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
and the United States), particularly the five rounds of
consultations held among the regional States. Germany
strongly regrets that, despite these persistent efforts, it has thus
far not been possible to convene the Helsinki Conference. As
stated in the 2010 Final Document, a prerequisite for a
successful meeting is that the regional parties engage freely
and actively with one another in order to reach a consensus on
a date and an agenda for the Helsinki Conference. Germany
believes that, thanks to the several rounds of consultations,
progress has been made on which it should be possible to build.
This Conference should send a strong signal of support for
advancing this important issue.
Thank you!

