Check against delivery!

Statement of Hungary

First Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Cluster II - Nuclear non-proliferation
Mr. Chairman,
Thank you very much for giving me the floor. Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union on Cluster II issues therefore I would like to make only a few remarks
from our national perspective.
As we stated in the general debate Hungary is of the view that the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, as well as, that of nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
Unfortunately the world continues to face major proliferation challenges that represent one of
the gravest threats to international peace and security. Therefore proliferation risks must be
addressed in an effective way to preserve the credibility and integrity of the NPT. We greatly
appreciate the International Atomic Energy Agency's work in this field. The Agency and its
system of comprehensive safeguards are fundamental elements of the nuclear nonproliferation regime. We call on States to help enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of
the Agency and thus contribute to strengthening the global non-proliferation regime.
UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) on non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery is also a key element of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, and its role is more crucial than ever in preventing terrorist groups from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction including nuclear and radiological weapons.
Let me emphasize that the international export control regimes such as the Nuclear Suppliers
Group (NSG), the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Australia Group and the
Zangger Committee are legitimate means of implementing obligations under Article III of the
Treaty because they can effectively contribute to addressing proliferation threats.
Mr. Chainnan,
The two nuclear and the multiple ballistic missile tests carried out in the last two years by
North Korea are signaling a particularly alanning trend. Hungary condemns in the strongest
terms that the DPRK is violating a number of relevant UN Security Council resolutions,
posing a serious threat to the security and stability of the region and the whole world.
Hungary supports the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and in this regard urges
North-Korea to return to the NPT and the IAEA Safeguards. The DPRK's example underlines
that withdrawal from the NPT carries inherent proliferation risks and therefore we have to pay
more attention to Article X of the Treaty and work out strict principles for exercising the right
of withdrawal.

Check against delivery!

16 January 2017 marked the first anniversary of the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We believe that the JCPOA is in full conformity
with the principles of the NPT and thus creates a positive example for resolving controversial
questions within the broader framework of the Treaty. It is an important non-proliferation
instrument, which successfully contributes to the overall goals of the NPT and nonproliferation. It is in the interest of all Parties to the Action Plan that its provisions are fully
implemented. So far, we are pleased with the fulfilment of obligations by all sides, which
remains crucial throughout the implementation of the JCPOA.
With regards to the specific issue of the Middle East we strongly support the establishment of
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We support efforts to
create the conditions for launching this process at a conference to be attended by all states of
the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by them. We encourage all relevant
stakeholders in particular the States of the region that have primary responsibility for
advancing this goal to have an open mind and engage actively in consultations on this issue of
great importance ..
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, let me reiterate our unconditional support for the NPT and our
commitment to its full and balanced implementation.

