PERMANENT MISSION OF REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS, WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

16, Rue de Saint-Jean - 1203 Geneva - Tel. (022) 338 33 50

Statement by

H.E. Mr. Edi Yusup
Ambassador and Deputy Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations,
WTO and other international organizations

Cluster 2 Issues:
Implementation of the provisions of the Treaty relating
to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards and
nuclear-weapon-free-zones

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 26 April 2013

Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia associates itself with the statement delivered earlier on Cluster 2
Issues by the Group of Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and the relevant working papers
submitted by the NAM States Parties to the NPT.
Indonesia advocates that the three pillars of the NPT - nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy - must be promoted in a
mutually reinforcing manner. Achieving a balanced progress among the three pillars of
the NPT is truly the aspiration and intention of the Treaty itself.
However a balanced substantive progress between disarmament and nonproliferation is not imminent. Non-nuclear weapon states have given their commitment
to forgo any aspiration to develop nuclear weapons. Yet nuclear weapon states have
not fulfilled its obligations under Article VI and still possess nuclear weapons to defend
themselves. The current trend of shifting priority to non-proliferation at the expense of
the debate in the disarmament will undermine the credibility of the Treaty itself.
Despite the continued imbalance between the two pillars, the NPT proved to be
successful in preventing nuclear non-proliferation throughout more than 40 years of its
existence. A comprehensive safeguards agreement coupled with an Additional Protocol
covers the verification standards that can provide assurance that an NPT state party
adheres to the obligation under the Treaty.
The fundamental principles underlying the right to activities related to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy are ensuring the peaceful nature of the nuclear
activities is not abused. However, the development and use of nuclear technologies is
not without risk of proliferation. Therefore, we believe a strengthened IAEA safeguards
system, including through the application of the Additional Protocol, will serve as an
essential element of our collective efforts to address the nonproliferation risk of all
peaceful nuclear activities.
IAEA has played an important role as the sole competent authority with the
mandate for verifying and assuring compliance by NPT states parties with their
safeguards obligations. It has also successfully prevented declared nuclear materials in
the non-nuclear weapon states from being diverted to non-peaceful purposes.
Therefore, universalization of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement is essential
for the non-proliferation objective to be achieved.
Mr. Chairman,
We believe that nuclear weapon free zones play a significant role in enhancing
regional and global peace. We also believe that nuclear weapon free zones created by
the treaties of Tlateloco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, Pelindaba and Central Asian Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone as well as Mongolia's nuclear weapon free status contribute
significantly to strengthening global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regimes.
1

We emphasize the importance of preserving Southeast Asia as a nuclear
weapon free zone and free from threat of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction. We take note of the progress made in concluding negotiations between
ASEAN and the five nuclear weapon states on the Protocol of the Treaty on Southeast
Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ). We look forward to the signing of the
Protocol to the Treaty on SEANWFZ and its related documents without reservations as
early as possible.
In strengthening our efforts to global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
Indonesia underscores the importance of the establishment of nuclear weapon free
zones where they do not exist, especially in the Middle East. As mandated in the 2010
NPT Action Plan, we look forward to the convening of the Middle East Conference on
the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction, at the earliest opportunity. In that regard, we are very much disappointed
with the failure of convening Helsinki conference in December 2012.
In the context of nuclear weapons free zones, we would like to stress that it is
also necessary that nuclear weapon states provide unconditional, non-discriminatory
and assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons to all non nuclear
weapon states of the zone that are parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia continues to consider Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as an
essential element of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime. Since the adoption
of the 2010 NPT Action Plan, eight additional states have become parties, including one
Annex II country, which is Indonesia. However, the entry into force of CTBT is not
possible without the remaining eight countries of Annex II ratify the Treaty. CTBT and its
extensive and effective verification regime will become essential tools to prevent, deter
and detect nuclear weapon testing. Therefore, we call on the remaining countries of
Annex II to ratify the CTBT soon.
Thank you.

