Please check against delivery

Statement of the Indonesian Delegation to
The First Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Cluster 2
Vienna, 7 May 2012

My delegation associates itself with the statement of the Non-Alignment
Movement States Parties to the NPT on this cluster.

Mr. Chairman,
Since we ratified the NPT in 1979, Indonesia has been a strong advocate of the
need for balanced progress in all three pillars of upon which the Treaty is founded.
Balance is particularly important between the disarmament pillar and the
nonproliferation pillar, as they are not only closely interrelated but also mutually
reinforcing. On top of that, we have to be mindful that the non-nuclear weapon states
(NNWS) have given their commitment to forgo any aspiration to develop nuclear
weapons quid pro quo with the irrevocable commitment of nuclear weapon states to
systematically and progressively implement Article VI of the NPT.
However, ever since, there has been a shifting trend that has given priority
exclusively to nonproliferation, at the expense of the debate on disarmament. This trend
has contributed to the lack of substantive progress in the disarmament agenda. For nonnuclear weapon states, it is difficult to understand how we can realistically expect less
powerful states to forgo aspirations to develop nuclear weapons if states among the
most powerful military forces in history insist that they still need nuclear weapons to
defend themselves. It is, therefore, our strong view that rebalancing this agenda has
utmost importance as we begin the new NPT review cycle.
Despite the continued imbalance between the two pillars, which in the long run
could erode the credibility of this Treaty, we have to recognize that the NPT has proven
very successful in preventing nuclear nonproliferation throughout its more than 40
years of existence.

The success in nonproliferation is mainly due to the credibility and effectiveness
of the verification system that has been put in place. Through the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement as undertaken by the IAEA, as required of all non-nuclear
weapon states by the Treaty, we have successfully prevented declared nuclear materials
in the non-nuclear weapon states from being diverted to non-peaceful purposes.
Therefore, universalization of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement is essential for
the nonproliferation objective to be achieved.
Notwithstanding, Indonesia is fully aware of the fact that the development and
use of nuclear technologies, which are essential for human progress, involve a risk of
proliferation. Therefore, we believe that a strengthened IAEA safeguards system,
including through the application of the Additional Protocol, will serve as an essential
element of our collective efforts to address the nonproliferation risk of all peaceful
nuclear activities.
We are also aware of the important role of a strong national nuclear legislation in
helping countries to fulfill their nonproliferation obligation. In this pursuit, Indonesia is
currently developing its comprehensive national nuclear legislation, incorporating main
provisions of all relevant international instruments in the nuclear field. Once
completed, we hope we could share it with other States Parties as part of our
contribution to the strengthening of the nonproliferation regime.

Mr. Chairman,

With regard to nonproliferation cases, Indonesia continues to believe that
diplomacy, dialogue, cooperation and negotiation are the only options for resolving
them. Therefore, any initiative which could weigh down and sidetrack dialogue,
cooperation and negotiation in resolving those cases should be avoided. We also have
to prevent ourselves from becoming mired in a protracted stalemate fueled by insults
and public posturing instead of meaningful dialogue. Indonesia continues to believe in
the importance of nurturing and promoting an atmosphere conducive to negotiation in
resolving any nonproliferation cases, and we support more intensive dialogue on such
cases among all interested parties, as we are of the firm belief that diplomacy and
negotiation remain our best choices for a peaceful solution.

Mr. Chairman,
We believe that Nuclear Weapon Free Zones are an essential regional effort in
our pursuit of creating a nuclear weapon free world. Our commitment to strengthening
and expanding NWFZs has never wavered. For a NWFZ to be strengthened and
credible, compliance of all states parties to their respective NWFZ Treaty obligation is
required, including for the states parties to the NWFZ to prevent nuclear trade with
countries lacking Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.
In this regard, we wish to underline the resumption of the direct consultations
between NWS and Parties to the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone during the
Indonesian Chairmanship of ASEAN last year, which resulted in the conclusion of the
negotiation between the States Parties to the Treaty with the NWS with regard to the
Protocol. This development will allow early accession of the NWS to the Protocol of the
Bangkok Treaty, which we hope will be finished as soon as possible. We would like to
extend our appreciation to the NWS for the constructive engagement they showed
during the consultation.
We commend the organization of the first preparatory meeting for the 3rd
Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that establish Nuclear-WeaponFree Zones (NWFZs) and Mongolia on 27 April 2012. We believe that it will provide a
robust foundation for the success of the 3rd Conference in 2015, in which Indonesia has
agreed to serve as President.
The international community would not be doing its duty if it did not also focus
effectively on the Middle East. Therefore, Indonesia underscores the urgency of
establishing a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. In this regard, we fully support the convening of the Conference, as
mandated in the 2010 Action Plan. A nuclear weapons free Middle East will go a long
way toward helping to enable regional and international peace and security.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesian continues to consider the CTBT as an essential element of the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It should be recalled that after entry into
force, the CTBT and its extensive and effective verification regime will become essential
tools to prevent, deter and detect nuclear weapon testing. As our contribution to
making that day come sooner rather than later, we recently ratified the CTBT. We call
upon the remaining Annex II countries, especially the remaining nuclear weapon states
and other states claiming possession of nuclear weapons to follow suit,for it is they,
above all, who must first and foremost commit to the CTBT. We continue to view the
CTBT as a crucial tool in our efforts to further pursue the cause of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, we wish that this session of the Preparatory Committee,
under your able leadership, would be able to provide a robust foundation for us
advance the cause of nonproliferation and also to strike a balance between
nonproliferation and disarmament pillar of the Treaty.

1bankyou

