Pfease check agains t delivery

Statement by
Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia

at the Second Session of The Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 2: Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards
and nuclear weapon free zones

Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018

1

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia associates itself with the statement delivered in this Cluster by the NonAligned Movement Parties to the NPT, and its relevant working papers.
We believe that effective non-proliferation measures are inseparable from the
application of safeguards by the IAEA. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
established under the NPT, and strengthened by Additional Protocols, have proven
to be successful in providing credible assurance of the absence of undeclared
nuclear materials and facilities in non-nuclear weapon States.
Indonesia emphasizes that the strengthening of safeguards measures through the
application of the Additional Protocol, and the universalization of Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreements are a sustainable method of addressing non-proliferation.
Indonesia calls upon all nuclear-weapon States, as well'as all States not party to the
Treaty to place all their nuclear facilities under IAEA full-scope safeguards. Indonesia
also stresses the statutory role and capability of the IAEA in the verification of
nuclear disarmament, including the application of safeguards on nuclear materials
derived from the dismantling of nuclear weapons.
While recognizing the authority of the IAEA in the application of safeguards, my
delegation stresses the importance that the Agency's work in this regard be in
accordance with its Statutes and safeguards agreements; impartial and free of
political interference.
My delegation welcomes the conclusion of a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
and Additional Protocol between the State of Palestine and the IAEA, thereby
fulfilling its obligation under Article Ill of the NPT. By concluding this Agreement, the
State of Palestine both reaffirms its commitment to the NPT and provides its
assurance of the absence of undeclared nuclear materials in its terr itory.
Mr. Chairman,

Regarding the nuclear weapon free zones, Indonesia believes that these must lead
towards a nuclear-weapon-free wor!d.
Moreover, NWFZs provide an effective means for preventing nuclear test being
conducted in a region, and at the same time reaffirm the inalianable right of parties to
the NWFZ to activities of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
For more than 20 years, Indonesia and countries in South East Asia region have
enjoyed stability, peace and security derived from Bangkok Treaty. However, these
circumstances and for all objectives of NWFZ to be fully achieved require not only
2

commitment and trust from all parties to the Treaty, but also supports from nuclear
weapon states.
In this regard, we stress the importance of ·consultations between nuclear weapon
states and parties to the Bangkok Treaty for the early accession of the nuclear
weapon states to the protocol of the Bangkok Treaty. Nuclear weapon states and
members of ASEAN should continue to sharpen its focus of collaboration to resolve
comprehensively, in accordance wrth the objective and principle of the Bangkok
Treaty.
We express our deep concern over the slow progress of the establishment of a
nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East. Observing with grave concern the
deteriorating situations in the Middle East, it is high time that the establishment of the
Zone remains a priority.
We urge States in the region to launch negotiations at the earliest possible date, on
a treaty establishing a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East in accordance .
with the provisions of the NPT and the decisions of its Review Conferences, as well
as the Final Document of the First Special Session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament, and the guidelines and principles adopted by the United Nations
Disarmament Commission in ·1999.

I thank you.

3

