Mr. Chairman,

I have the honor to speak on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on the “Cluster 2” issues: (non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards, and nuclear-weapon-free zones).

NAM States Parties to the Treaty reaffirm that the IAEA is the sole competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance by States Parties with their safeguards agreements undertaken in fulfillment of their Treaty obligations; with a view to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices, as well as the global focal point for nuclear technical cooperation. 

Obligations under article III in verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes, provide credible assurances enabling States Parties to engage in the transfer of nuclear equipment, material and technology for peaceful purposes in accordance with Article IV.  Therefore, States Parties to the Treaty are called upon to refrain from imposing or maintaining any restriction or limitation on the transfer of nuclear equipment, material and technology to States Parties with comprehensive safeguards agreements.

Mr. Chairman,

We acknowledge that it is fundamental to make a distinction between legal obligations and voluntary confidence-building measures, in order to ensure that such voluntary undertakings are not turned into legal safeguards obligations.

We emphasize that States Parties to the NPT should consult and cooperate in resolving their issues with regard to implementation of the NPT related safeguards agreements within the IAEA framework.
 
Mr. Chairman,

On the issue of safeguards and verification, the NAM States Parties to the NPT recommend the following to be considered by the Preparatory Committee as recommendations to the 2010 Review Conference: 

1.	To reiterate the commitment of all States parties to the Treaty to prohibit the transfer of all nuclear-related equipment, information, material and facilities, resources or devices, and the extension of know-how or any kind of assistance in the nuclear, scientific or technological fields to Israel, as long as it remains a non-party to the Treaty and has not placed all its nuclear facilities under full-scope IAEA safeguards.

2.	To reiterate that the IAEA’s work with regard to safeguards and verification needs to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of its statute and full scope safeguards agreements. 

3.	To request all states that have not yet done so to bring into force comprehensive safeguards agreements as soon as possible with a view to consolidate and enhance the verification system for the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime, through the universalization of comprehensive safeguards.

4.	To request that all nuclear-weapon States and all States not party to the Treaty to place all their nuclear facilities under IAEA full scope safeguards.  This should be set forth in an agreement to be negotiated and concluded with the IAEA in accordance with the NPT and IAEA statute, for the exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of nuclear-weapon States’ obligations with a view to providing baseline data for future disarmament and preventing further diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, as well as the prohibition of the transfer of all nuclear related equipment, information, material and facilities, resources or devices and the extension of assistance in the nuclear scientific or technological fields to States non-parties to the Treaty without exception.


Mr. Chairman,

Another important issue is that of Nuclear-weapon-free-zones (NWFZ’s). We welcome the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones in all regions of the world, and call for cooperation and broad consultations in order to achieve agreements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned.

In the context of NWFZs, it is essential that nuclear-weapon States provide unconditional assurances against the threat or use of nuclear weapons to all States in the NWFZ zone.  The Group urges States to conclude agreements with a view to establishing new NWFZ’s in regions where they do not exist, in accordance with the provisions of the Final Document of the First Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament and the principles and guidelines adopted by the UNDC at its 1999 substantive session.

We stress the importance of the signature and ratification of the Treaties of Rorotonga, Pelindaba, and the Central Asia nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaty as well as Mongolia’s nuclear weapon-free status by all States in their respective regions, as well as the signature and ratification by the nuclear-weapon States that have not yet done so of the relevant Protocols to those treaties.

NAM States Parties to the NPT welcome consultations between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the nuclear-weapon States on the Protocol of the South-East Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and urge the nuclear-weapon States to become parties to the Protocol of the Treaty as soon as possible.

We welcome talks by Mongolia with its two neighbors to conclude the required legal instrument institutionalizing Mongolia’s nuclear-weapon free status.

On the basis of these principles, NAM States Parties to the NPT proposes the following recommendations as inputs to be considered by the Preparatory Committee on NWFZ’s at the 2010 Review Conference:

1.	To confirm the establishment of NWFZ’s, created by the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, Pelindaba, and the Central Asia nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaty as well as Mongolia’s nuclear weapon-free status represents a positive step and important measure towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.  

2.	To reiterate the crucial need for a speedy establishment of a NWFZ in the Middle East without any further delay. 


Finally, Mr. Chairman,

The NAM Parties to the Treaty urge progress on nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, verification and safeguards in the near future, and pledge to work constructively in favor of these objectives.

