Please Check Against Delivery

Statement by
Mr. Kamapradipta Isnomo.
Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Indonesia
to the United Nations

Main Committee II
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

New York, 5 May 2015
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
325 East 38 th Street, New York, NY 10016· Tel. (212) 972-8333 • Fax. (212) 972-9780
www.indonesiamission-ny.org
email: ptri@indonesiamission-ny.org

Mr. Chairman,

I congratulate you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of the
Committee. Indonesia assures you of its cooperation and support in
your important work.
My delegation fully associates itself with the statement made by the
distinguished delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia acknowledges the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) as the sole competent authority responsible for verification of
the fulfillment of safeguard obligations assumed by States Parties
under the Treaty, in order to prevent the diversion of nuclear energy
from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.
As a member State of the IAEA with a Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements (CSAs) as well as an Additional Protocol in place,
Indonesia has fulfilled its safeguards obligation accordingly. In this
regard, the IAEA has for many years concluded that all nuclear
program and activities in Indonesia are for peaceful purposes.

Indonesia fully recognizes the importance of the Additional Protocol
as an essential element of confidence building measures in the
current safeguards mechanism, since the IAEA is unable to fully
provide assurances on the peaceful nature of any country's nuclear
activities without having an Additional Protocol in place.
While the majority of NPT States Parties have concluded CSAs with
the IAEA, many have not adopted the Additional Protocol to their
safeguards agreements. In this regard, Indonesia calls on all NPT
states parties that have not done so to immediately sign the
safeguards agreement and put all their peaceful nuclear facilities
under IAEA safeguards. Indonesia also supports that a CSA
accompanied by an AP should be an internationally recognized
safeguards standard with regard to the supply of nuclear material and
equipment.
Indonesia believes that there should be an effort to provide incentives
for Parties that comply with the provisions of the NPT. Such
incentives should be directed to bolster their respective capacities in
the peaceful use of nuclear technology to achieve sustainable,
internationally-agreed development goals. With this, we can all
collaborate to ensure the integrity of this Treaty.
On State Level Concept (SLC), Indonesia is aware of the increasingly
complex safeguards challenges faced by the Agency. Indonesia is of
the view that the Agency needs to improve the safeguard efficiency
and effectiveness in anticipating the growing workload of the Agency
in the future.

While supporting the Agency's efforts to continuously improve and
develop new measures and approaches to enhance efficiency and
effectiveness, Indonesia is of the view that such efforts should be
done in close consultation with member States, and any proposed
measures and approaches should not entail any new obligation to the
member Countries.

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia is of the view that nuclear weapon States should undertake
more efforts in a transparent, irreversible and internationally verifiable
manner to totally eliminate all types of nuclear weapons, as well as
nuclear weapon-related

materials,

including through

unilateral,

bilateral, regional and multilateral measures.
In this regard, Indonesia would like to emphasize the need for
increased transparency regarding the operations of nuclear facilities
for peaceful purposes by States Parties, particularly the NWS,
including those involving the export I import of fissile materials.;
Indonesia further expresses its support in efforts to improve the
security system of the IAEA safeguards information, especially
information related to national security. Serious efforts to safeguard
the security of information would help to maintain the credibility of
IAEA safeguards, and at the same time negate the reason for
countries not to provide information to the IAEA.

Mr. Chairman,
It has been widely recognized that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones contributes to strengthening global disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. They are necessary as part of a
collective effort to reduce and ultimately eliminate the threat from
nuclear weapons, as well as to prevent nuclear test being conducted
in the region.
Indonesia has a strong conviction that nuclear-weapon-free zones
are important measures to achieve a world free from nuclear
weapons. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones by the
Treaties of Bangkok, Pelindaba, Rarotonga, Semipalatinsk and
Tlatelolco, as well as Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status, is thus
clearly a positive step towards attaining the objectives of the NPT and
enhancing international peace and security.
As the President of the Third Conference of States Parties and
Signatories to Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia (CNWFZ
III) which was held last week, Indonesia would therefore like to
express its disappointment over the failure of the Conference to adopt
a Final Outcome Document, which essentially was designed to affirm
our effort in achieving a world free of nuclear weapons.

