lease check
3
--J

against

delivery

Statement by H.E. Mr. Reza Najafi
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations and other International Organizations Vienna
On Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Vienna. S Ma 2017
-

In the vuine o[ God, the Most Coinpu.svionate. the Most Merciful.

Mr. Chairman
I associatemv delenation with the NAM statement delivered h Indonesia.
As the most horrendous weanons ever developed. nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to
the very survival o I’ humanity. The only absolute guarantee against thmr threat or use is
indeed their total elimination Accordingly. nuclear disarmament should remain the highest
priority, and non-proliferation have to be considered only as an interim measure, driving its
legitimacy from nuclear disarmament.
The Islamic Republic of Iran recognizes the importance of the non-proliferation objective and
accomplishments made in this field. However, overemphasizing the non-proliferation, as if
the Treaty has no other objective than non-proliferation, is both misleading and
counterproductive.
Nuclear non—proliferation and nuclear disarmament are mutually reinfbrcing only if the non
proliferation efforts accompanied by parallel steps aimed at genuine nuclear disarmament.
Only those non—po1iferation measures can be considered genuine and etièctive that prey ent
completely the spread of nuclear weapons to geographical areas beyond the territories ol the
nuclear—weapon States: halt assisting. directly or indirectly, other countries. v hether party or
non-partY to the Treaty. to manufacture or otherwise acquire or take control over nuclear
weapons: and prevent the dcv elopment of any new t pes of such weapons or upgrading the
existing nuclear weapons.
Iran believes that the implementation status of the non—prol ifëration provisions of the Treaty
should be assessed. inter alia. in the light of the actual progress in preveming: horizontal and
vertical proliferation, upgrading the existing nuclear weapons, developing ne types of such
weapons, construction of new facilities for the production of nuclear-weapons, nuclearweapon-sharing and assisting other States, directly or indirectly, to manufacture or otherwise
acquire nuclear weapons, the establishment and promoting the effectiveness of the nuclearweapon-free zones, realizing the universality of the Treaty, and providing universal effective
unconditional legally binding assurances to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties against the
threat or use of nuclear weapons under all circumstances.
Nuclear-weapon-sharing of any kind is a cleat’ violation of the explicit obligations of
concerned States parties under articles I and II of the Treaty, Likewise. the ongoing measures
and plans of all nuclear-weapon States to modernize or upgrade their nuclear weapon
arsenals. and of certain nuclear-xveapon States to develop new t pes of such weapons,
including new types of tactical nuclear veapons that increases the possibility and risk of
are other sources ot’ grave concern. This trend continues to undermine the
their use
effectiveness of the Treat\ and its object and purpose. and have to he addressed by the
Revie Conference,
-

—

Mr. Chairman,
Stressing the role and importance of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones. we
beliee however that they substitute neither other non-proliferation measures. nor the total
elimination of nuclear weapons worldwide. To be effective, they need to be complemented
by granting full. effectie. non-discriminatoiw. unconditional and irrevocable legally binding
securits assurances to all the parties to treaties establishing these zones against the threat or
use of nuclear weapons under all circumstances. In addition, such zones need to be
established in other parts of the world, in particular in such a olatile region as the Middle
East, where the nuclear weapons of the Israeli regime continue to threaten the region and
hey ond,
As the initiator of the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East. Iran supported the adoption of the 1995 Resolution and the 2010 action plan for its
implementation. We also took many other steps to that end, some of which are reflected in
our national report submitted to this meeting.
However, it is a source of grave concern that after 22 years, the 1995 Resolution is not yet
implemented. Additionally, it is also very disappointing that not only was the 2010 plan of
action not implemented and, consequently. the 2012 conference not consened due to
unacceptable justifications raised then by the tT,S,, but in addition, the 2015 Review
Conference was unable to reach an agreement on its outcome document because of the
objection. including by the U S to a decision contained therein on the implementation of the
1995 Resolution.
.

The stubborn opposition of the Israeli regime is. with no doubt, the only and main obstacle in
the establishment of such a Lone, However, the U.S. role in rendering blind support to the
Israeli regime, which resulted in not conening the 2012 Conference and in preventing the
adoption of the Final Document of the 2015 Review Conference, should not also be
disregarded.
Therefore, while such U.S. supports need to be discontinued, the only way for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East is to exert and maintain, by
the international community of States, a sustained pressure on Israel in order to compel it to
accede, promptly and unconditionally as a non-nuclear weapon party. to the Treaty and to
place all of its nuclear activities and installations under the IAEA full-scope safeguards. as
reaffirmed by the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences,
Finally, we urge the 2020 Review Conference to consider this issue on a priority basis and
agree on concrete steps for the speedy implementation of the 1 995 Resolution that is an
essential and integral element of the outcome of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
and of the basis on which the Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

