IRELAND
Cluster II Specific Issue:
Regional Issues, including with respect to the Middle East and
Implementation of the 1995 Middle East Resolution

Statement by

Mr. Jamie Walsh
Deputy-Director, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of For~ign Affairs and Trade

At the

·

2018 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT}

Geneva, 30 April, 2018

Check against Delivery

Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union under
this cluster .

Mr. Chairman,
The topics under discussion within the remit of Cluster ll's specific issues are
some of the most fundamentally challenging for the NPT. Weapons of mass
destruction have no place anywhere in our world but are a particularly
destabilising pres.ence in what are often complex and delicate regional
relationships.

In that regard, I wish to emphasize Ireland's support for the establishment of a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction and the ir delivery systems in the
Middle East. We firmly believe that the path for action as set out in 2010 Final
Document remains the most promising basis on which to proceed.

We are disappointed that the conference has yet to be convened, but we are by
no means resigned . We strongly urge the co-conveners and regional states to
work face-to-face and reach agreement as soon as possible on all necessary
arrangements for the conference.

We understand and share the serious concern voiced by some delegations at
the slow pace of progress. But we should not lose sight of the valuable
preliminary work that has been achieved by the Facilitator and his team. The
outcome of those efforts cannot be discarded.

All States parties to the NPT have an obligation to work towards convening the
conference as soon as possible. As my delegation highlighted in our statement
to Cluster 11,the NPT is built upon a series of a delicate bargains. Reaching
consensus at review cycles is also reliant on carefully crafted, sometimes fragile
agreements. Adherence and commitment to those agreements is fundamental
to the continued ·trust we ·place in the NPT itself. Without the package of
decisions agreed at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, it's impossible
to see how the indefinite extension of the NPT could have been approved.

We have a responsibility therefore, within the NPT framework, to continue our
efforts to carve a path forward. The more difficult the issue, the greater priority
and more consistent attention we should devote to it.
In this regard, my delegation reiterates its call to establish a dedicated resource
that would ensure engagement, momentum and continuity is maintained
throughout

the Review Cycle. This should include documentation

to be

considered by a wide group of experts and officials. The resources for this
endeavour would be a matter for the UN and the UN Secretary General to decide
but Ireland will be a firm supporter of any decision that accords the necessary
priority to this issue.

My delegation together with BASIC,will host a side event on the zone to explore
the possibilities that exist on 1 May. It's important to remember that civil society
can play a key role in this process and we welcome and encourage their
engagement.

Mr. Chairman,
Ireland warmly welcomes the positive outcome of the inter-Korean summit and
prospect of further direct talks between the United States and the DPRK. From
our own experience in Northern Ireland, we know that diplomacy and dialogue
are the only routes to a meaningful and lasting peace. Of course, that dialogue
must be backed by concrete action and, in this regard, we call on the DPRKto
fully address international concerns related to its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. It can do so by returning to the · NPT and implementing IAEA
Comprehensive Safeguards and by signing and ratifying the CTBTwithout delay.
The end result will, we hope, be the complete denuclearisation of the Korean
peninsula which would represent a major gain for the disarmament and nonproliferation regime.

Mr. Chairman,
Ireland firmly believes that Nuclear Weapon Free Zones across the globe can
play an important

role in promoting regional and international

peace and

stability. We have much to learn from these regional agreements and from the
positive example of the JCPOA. They demonstrate what is possible when
genuine and focussed multilateral efforts are directed at what are portrayed as
intractable differences.

Faithfulness to our past commitments is essential for building trust in the
regional context. It is vital if we are to ensure the regional disputes of today do
not become the global conflicts of tomorrow .

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.


Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union and
with the working paper submitted by the Vienna Group of Ten.

Mr Chairman,

Ireland welcomes the increased attention to the devastating humanitarian
consequences that the use of nuclear weapons would bring. By raising
awareness of this issue, we reinforce the global norm against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Indeed, our aim should be to remove any
notion of prestige or pride associated with the acquisition of nuclear weapons.
We can achieve this by taking the debate outside of traditional and narrow
viewpoints, and by including the very real human, environmental and
developmental costs that would accompany any nuclear explosion, whether by
accident or design.

Mr. Chairman,

The non-proliferation pillar of the Treaty is essential, in and of itself, but also to
facilitate

the

mutually

reinforcing

and

mutually

important

pillars

of

disarmament and peaceful uses. Ireland is fully committed to advancing the.
non-proliferation aims of the Treaty.

Considerable work has been undertaken to develop the complex network of
legal instruments, non-proliferation arrangements and initiatives around the
,

NPT. This framework is effective, but it is imperative that we do not become
complacent. Simple expressions of support are not enough to curb the
proliferation of nuclear weapons technology, material and know-how. It is
incumbent on us all to support the non-proliferation aspects of the treaty in a
pragmatic way. The full and effective participation of women in these debates
will also serve to enrich our discussions and ensure an inclusive and diverse
range of inputs.

Mr Chairman,

As a tangible expression of Ireland's commitment, this year, together with
Iceland, we are co-Chairing the Missile Technology Control Regime. A successful
plenary was hosted in Dublin last October where an extensive review and
evaluation of the regime's activities over the previous 12 months was
conducted. Partners devoted increased attention to Intangible Technology
Transfer, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Catch All Controls and

Regional

Proliferation issues. The Co-Chairs have also embarked on an ambitious and
strategic outreach programme to non-MTCR countries to further advance the
regime's profile and ensure that as many states as possible adhere to what are
the best practice guidelines for export controls of missile technology.

Strong export controls provide an effective bulwark against the illicit spread of
nuclear technology but they must do so in a way that facilitates the smooth
transfer of technology and equiprnent for peaceful uses, in accordance with
Articles I to IV of the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,

The NPT is, at its heart, a bargain where benefits and responsibilities are
delicately balanced. In order for the NPT to function effectively, the
international community must have concrete assurances that nuclear activities
undertaken by states are exclusively for peaceful purposes. The IAEA's
safeguards system is absolutely crucial in this regard. We urge those states that
have not already done so to conclude and bring into force an Additional Protocol
without delay, particularly those with significant nuclear activities. We must also
ensure that the IAEA is given adequate resources to ensure that it can conduct
its essential work independently and effectively.

Ireland believes the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) agreed by the
E3+3 and Iran is a hugely significant non-proliferation agreement. It
demonstrated what can be achieved through effective multilateral diplomacy
and we call on all parties to implement all parts of the deal fully and effect.ively,
for we all have a stake in supporting its success. In this regard we are pleased to
announce that Ireland will contribute another €20,000 towards the IAEA's
monitoring and verification activities in Iran.

Mr. Chairman,

The dangerous and provocative actions of the DPRK confirm the absolute
necessity to further strengthen the NPT. The DPRK's repeated nuclear tests
represent the only breach this century of the global norm against nuclear
testing. We welcome today's inter-Korean summit and are encouraged by the
prospect of direct talks between the DPRK and the US. However, these talks
must be matched by action. We urgently call on the DPRK to fully address
international concerns related to its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes
and to sign and ratify the CTBT without delay. The denuclearisation of the
Korean peninsula would represent a major gain for the disarmament and nonproliferation regime.

Ireland also fully supports the role of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones across the
globe. Such zones can play an important role in promoting regional and
international peace and stability. They complement and reinforce the NPT itself,
as do a number of other multilateral instruments. The range of coverage of
nuclear weapon free zones is a powerful demonstration of the determination of
the majority of states to eliminate nuclear weapons entirely.

I would like to reiterate Ireland's absolute support for the establishment of a
WMD-free-zone in the Middle East in accordance with the 1995 resolution.
Ireland, together with BASIC, will be host a side event on 1 May to explore the
possibilities that exist to move this important issue forward.

To conclude, Mr. Chairman, Ireland believes that the only way to ultimately fulfil
. the non-proliferation goal of the NPT is through its universalisation. Ireland calls
on all states that have not yet done so to join the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon
States and, pending accession, to fully adhere to its terms. Promoting adherence
to the Treaty is a collective responsibility on all States Parties and we should
collectively strive for its universalisation.

Thank you


