IRELAND
Statement by

Mr. Breifne O'Reilly
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department ofForeign Affairs and Trade of Ireland

at the

Preparatory Committee for the 20 15 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 11

New York, 1 May 2014

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND TO THE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TELEPHONE 212 421·6934 FAX 212 752-4726
newyorkpmun@dfa.ie

Mr Chairman,

Ireland aligns itself with the statement by the European Union under this cluster.
Ireland has consistently argued for a balanced implementation across all three pillars
of the NPT and attaches equal importance to its non-proliferation provisions. We
must protect this pillar. The Treaty has stemmed the wide-scale horizontal
proliferation which would undoubtedly have ensued in its absence, and we are
strongly committed to furthering the objectives of the non-proliferation pillar - both on
its own merits, as a means of reducing risk and as a contribution to the goal of
disarmament.
Together with our fellow members of the Vienna Group ofTen, Ireland has proposed
a number of working papers to this Preparatory Committee on compliance and
verification; on the CTBT; on export controls; on nuclear safety and on nuclear
security. We hope these submissions will contribute to the work of the conference
and more generally to our joint efforts to implement this pillar of the Treaty.
Mr Chairman,
At the outset, Ireland wishes to underline that it is a collective obligation and
responsibility on all State parties to promote universal adherence to the NPT, as set
out in Action 23 of the Action Plan. We wish to reaffirm the central importance of the
IAEA's safeguards system to the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We urge those
states which have yet to do so to bring into force Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreements and the Additional Protocol as soon as possible.
Ireland fully supports the on-going work of the IAEA in strengthening the
effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the IAEA safeguards systems. In
particular, we wish to commend the on-going discussions among IAEA member states
and policy-making bodies about implementing safeguards at the state level, as
recommended in Action 32 of the 2010 Action Plan.

Mr Chairman,

Ireland and our EU partners are subject to a comprehensive Code of Conduct on
military and dual use exports. We believe that the Code of Conduct represents one of
the strongest export control regimes in the world. Like many states present, Ireland is
an active participant in a number of export control regimes, the aim of which is to
counter, curb and prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology, material or
know-how. These arrangements are important, practical elements of the nonproliferation regime built around the NPT.

It is also important however that our export control arrangements continue to facilitate
transfers of technology and equipment for peaceful uses. To do this, however, and as
Action 35 stipulates, we must be in a position to ensure that such exports do not
directly or indirectly facilitate the development of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices.
Mr Chairman,
In autumn 2015, Ireland will host an IAEA Peer Review Mission. This will be an
Integrated Regulatory Peer Review Mission (IRRS) and will look at Ireland' s
regulatory framework governing safety. Ireland is a party to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and actively participates in meetings of the
Convention in Vienna, where we have chaired one of the working groups. As regards
the amendment to the Convention, Ireland is already acting in accordance with the
objectives and the purpose of the amendment, as recommended in Action 42. We
expect that to give statutory expression to the amendment this summer.
Mr Chairman,
We strongly support the outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference on the Middle
East and reaffirm our full support for the establishment of a zone free of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We regret that it has
not been possible so far to convene a Conference on the establishment of such a zone
and strongly support the continuing, tireless efforts of the Facilitator and co-convenors
to bring this about. As a small contribution to the discussion on this most vital of
issues, we have provided support for the work of the Canadian N GO - Atomic
Reporters - in encouraging journalists from the region to report on nuclear-related
issues. Ireland's support will help run a workshop in Vienna later this year.

Mr Chairman,

The DPRK represents the most serious nuclear proliferation challenge facing the
international community today. Ireland deplores all DPRK satellite launches using
ballistic missile technology and nuclear tests in blatant violation of the DPRK' s
international obligations. We call upon the DPRK to desist from any further
provocative actions and to return to full compliance with its obligations under the
NPT and its IAEA safeguards agreements. The international community must
continue to urge the DPRK to re-engage in talks on the de-nuclearisation of the
Korean peninsula, immediately and without prior conditions.

We deplore Syria's undeclared steps towards a nuclear reactor, as set out in a
succession oflAEA reports since 2010. We call on Syria to cooperate fully with the
IAEA and the UN, and, in particular, to comply with their commitments under their
NPT Safeguards Agreement, to cooperate fully and transparently with the IAEA and
to sign and ratify the Additional Protocol as soon as possible.

Mr Chairman,
Turning to Iran, Ireland fully respects the rights of all State parties to the NPT to the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Such rights also come with obligations. Since
the meeting in Geneva in May 2013, we have seen significant and positive
developments with regard to Iran - specifically the Framework for Cooperation signed
between the IAEA and Iran on 11 November 2013 in Tehran and also the Joint Plan of
Action signed between the E3 I EU + 3 and Iran on 24 November 20 13 in Geneva. As
has been recently noted by the IAEA Director General: "the measures implemented by
Iran, and the further commitments it has undertaken, represent a positive step forward,
but much remains to be done to resolve all outstanding issues."
In conclusion, Mr Chairman,
Ireland has always put particular emphasis on disarmament as the critical element in
any concerted effort towards a world free of nuclear weapons. The conviction that
there is an inseparable link between the goals of disarmament and non-proliferation
was one of the reasons behind the formation of the New Agenda Coalition. In
common with our partners in the New Agenda Coalition, we remain convinced that
moves on disarmament and in the area of non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing.
The failure to act on disarmament undermines the NPT's undoubted achievements on
non-proliferation. The international community - including the State parties present
here- need to move both processes forward urgently, if we are to succeed in lessening
the ever-present and increasingly known risks to life on this planet represented by
nuclear weapons. ENDS

