IRELAND
Statement by

H.E. Ms. Patricia 0 'Brien,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations and
Other International Organisations in Geneva

Atthe

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Main Committee II

New York, 6 May 2015

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND TO THE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TELEPHONE 212 421-6934 FAX 212 752-4726
newyorkpmun@dfa.ie

Mr. Chairman,
Let me congratulate you on your election as Chairman of Main Committee II and
assure you of Ireland's full support.
Ireland aligns itself with the statements made to this Committee by the EU and the
Vienna Group of Ten.
Ireland welcomes the renewed and increased focus in recent years on the
devastating humanitarian consequences of a nuclear weapons detonation. The
increased awareness among States Parties will, we are fully confident, bolster the
global norm against the proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction. Ireland
is absolutely committed to furthering the non-proliferation objectives of the Treaty,
both on its own undoubted and vital merits but also as a contributor to the goal of
disarmament. Considerable work has been done on the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons but it is a task that requires constant effort and constant vigilance.
The non-proliferation goal of the NPT can only be achieved ultimately by the
universalisation of the Treaty. Ireland calls on all states that have not yet done so to
join the Treaty as Non-Nuclear Weapons States and, pending their accession, to
adhere to its terms and pledge commitments to non-proliferation and disarmament.
Ireland would also remind all existing States Parties that it is a collective obligation
and responsibility on us all to promote universal adherence to the NPT.

IRAN
We welcome the recent agreement reached between the E3/EU +3 and the Islamic
Republic of Iran on the key parameters of a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
and we fully support the ongoing diplomatic efforts of the parties to bring the work
to a successful conclusion by 30 June. The outline agreement will allow Iran to
continue to develop its civil nuclear power programme, while providing
reassurance to its neighbours and others that there will be no military nuclear
programme. The agreement will provide for removal in due course of the sanctions
that have been placed on Iran in relation to this dispute, as well as the continued
monitoring of the Iranian programme by the appropriate international agency, the
IAEA.

MEWMDFZ
At the 2010 Review Conference, great efforts were made by States Parties to
advance work on the establishment of a Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone
in the Middle East. Ireland deeply regrets that it has not been possible so far to
convene a Conference on the establishment of such a zone, to be attended by States
in the region. We are very grateful to the Facilitator and his team and to the CoConvenors for their tireless efforts and we urge all States in the region to continue
to engage in dialogue. The creation of a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and all
other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East would make a very
significant contribution both to the region but also globally in further strengthening
the NPT, it is important that no opportunity is missed to bring about the creation of
this Zone.
DPRK

Mr Chairman,
The DPRK represents the most serious nuclear proliferation challenge facing the
international community today. Ireland deplores all DPRK nuclear tests and
satellite launches using ballistic missile technology, which are in blatant violation
of the DPRK's international obligations. We call upon the DPRK to desist from
any further provocative actions and to return to full compliance with its obligations
under the NPT and its IAEA safeguards agreements. The international community
must continue to urge the DPRK to re-engage in talks on the de-nuclearisation of
the Korean peninsula, immediately and without prior conditions.

Syria
Mr Chairman,
We deplore Syria's undeclared steps towards a nuclear reactor, as set out in a
succession ofIAEA reports since 2010. We call on Syria to comply with their
commitments under their NPT Safeguards Agreement, to cooperate fully and
transparently with the IAEA and to sign and ratify the Additional Protocol as soon
as possible.

Export Control Regimes

Turning to export controls, Ireland and our EU partners are subject to a
comprehensive Code of Conduct on military and dual use exports. This Code of
Conduct requires that export licences should be refused if approval would be
inconsistent with, inter alia, the non-proliferation provisions of the NPT. We
believe that the Code of Conduct represents one of the strongest export control
regimes in the world.
Together with many states present here, Ireland is an active participant in a number
of export control regimes, whose aim is to counter, curb and prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons technology, material or know-how.
It is important that our export control arrangements continue to facilitate transfers
of technology and equipment for peaceful uses, in conformity with Articles I, II, III
and IV of the Treaty. To do this, however, we must be in a position to ensure that
such exports do not directly or indirectly facilitate the development of nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. We take our responsibilities in this
area seriously and we encourage other states to do so as well.

IAEA Safeguards
The IAEA' s system of safeguards is of central importance to the nuclear nonproliferation regime. We urge those states which have yet to do so to bring into
force Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and the Additional Protocol as soon
as possible.
Ireland fully supports the on-going work of the IAEA in strengthening the
effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the IAEA safeguards systems.

Nuclear Safety/CPPNM
Mr Chairman,

In autumn 2015, Ireland will host an IAEA Peer Review Mission. This will be an
Integrated Regulatory Peer Review Mission (IRRS) and will look at Ireland's legal
and governmental :framework and regulatory infrastructure for safety.

Conclusion
Ireland is steadfast in its commitment to the non-proliferation pillar of the NPT but
it must be acknowledged that no pillar of the Treaty stands on its own. The grand
bargain of the NPT was struck on the understanding that those states in possession
of nuclear weapons would eliminate their arsenals in exchange for the undertaking
of all other States Parties not to pursue such weapons.
The failure to start multilateral discussion on nuclear disarmament undermines the
NPT' s undoubted achievements on non-proliferation. The international
community - including the State parties present here - need to act collectively in
moving both processes forward if we are to succeed in strengthening the Treaty.

