IRELAND
Cluster 2
Statement by

Ms Helena Nolan
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation

at the

2017 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

Vienna, 8 May 2017

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN VIENNA
ROTENTURMSTRASSE 16-18, A1010 VIENNA
Telephone: 017154246 E-mail: vienna@dfa.ie

Mr Chairman,

Ireland strongly supports the three, mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT and
we are resolute in our commitment to international non- proliferation, which
we see as important in its own right, as well as complimenting and reinforcing
our work on nuclear disarmament.

The proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery remain an ever present,
and indeed as we have been discussing here last week, increasing threat to
international peace and security. Given the interconnected nature of the world
we live in today, multilateral tools and regimes, which can help to raise both
awareness of, and prevent such proliferation, assume critical importance. With
regard to WMD's and their means of delivery, the Missile Technology Control
Regime constitutes a key instrument in international efforts to prevent missile
proliferation. Significantly, this year marks 30 years since the MTCR was
established and since that time the MTCR has proven to be a useful
multilateral non-proliferation mechanism. Through information sharing, export
controls, awareness raising and international cooperation, the MTCR has
significantly reduced the ability of proliferators to acquire the technology,
information and means to develop WMD missile deliver systems.

Ireland strongly supports UNSCR 1540 and UNSCR 2325 adopted last
December following last year's Review. We are active in all of the relevant
export control regimes and also engage with the GICNT. I am pleased to report
that, consistent with our commitment to international non-proliferation, later
this year, Ireland will assume, along with our Icelandic partners, the co-

chairmanship of the MTCR and we will host the 30th Anniversary Plenary in
Dublin from 16 to 23 October.
We are honoured to take up this role, together with Iceland, and are grateful
for the valuable support we have received so far, from both partners and nonpartners alike. During our tenure as joint co-chair, we will seek to enhance the
effectiveness of the MTCR through information sharing and awareness raising,
with both partners and non- partners, to ensure that the MTCR as a regime
retains its efficacy in the face of ever evolving technical and security
developments and we will seek to extend the impact and influence that this
regime can bring to bear.

The task ahead will not be an easy one, given the ever-evolving nature of the
threats we face. In the digital age, we face threats hitherto considered unlikely.
In recent times, the vulnerability of our cyber infrastructure, both civilian and
military, has been challenged and compromised. We have, in recent times,
witnessed the acceleration of missile programmes in certain countries, enabled
through illicit procurement, intangible technology transfer and perhaps, as
some suggest, through cyber espionage. As reported in the recent important
UNIDIR/Chatham House paper on Risk, we live in an age where cyber
technologies are in the grasp of most states, regardless of their economic
capacities, as well as non-state actors. This levels the strategic playing field and
creates hitherto unparalleled opportunities for small belligerent governments
or terrorist groups to instigate high impact attacks. This heightens the risk, not
only of an unintended nuclear detonation, but also the determinative impact
the manipulation of data may have in decision making.

The acceleration in missile programmes can be seen in stark terms in North
Korea. Despite international sanctions and pressure, the North Korean regime
continue to conduct missile tests, which undermine international peace,
stability and security.
These actions constitute a violation of international obligations not to produce
or test nuclear weapons and demonstrate a blatant disregard for the rule of
law. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Charles Flanagan T.D., has joined with our
international partners in repeatedly condemning North Korean these
continued violations of international commitments. Minister Flanagan has
stated that these tests "constitute a major challenge to international efforts to
advance global nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, a long standing
goal of Ireland's foreign policy. These acts are reckless and provocative and will
only lead to more severe diplomatic isolation for the regime, with detrimental
impacts on the lives of North Korean people".

Mr Chairman,

To be consistent and effective, our focus must be on the weapon and the
impact of the weapon, not on the actor and we bring this approach to our
work on all weapons issues. We endorse the former UNSG view that there are
no right hands for the wrong weapons. Given all the risk factors, our vigilance
and efforts on disarmament and to prevent proliferation are needed now more
than ever. Ireland stands with its international partners and will work tirelessly
during its tenure as MTCR co-chair, to prevent proliferation of WMD and their
means of delivery.

Mr Chairman, to conclude,

Security concerns and the security environment have been a recurring theme
in our discussions, but when we speak of security, especially when it comes to
weapons which respect no boundaries and whose reverberating poisons would
spread through the air to damage human, animal and plant life across
continents, as well as polluting our water and soil, with the potential to cause
famine and change our weather for a decade or more, it is also important to
adjust the perspective, from national, regional, international and take a global
view. In this regard, Ireland is pleased to introduce later this week a new
Working Paper on how our work in this Review Cycle should be undertaken in
context, not just the security context but also the wider context, mentioned by
many delegates, of poverty, development, climate, environment and gender.
This Working Paper is based on our collaborative research with Chatham
House, an updated version of which has been made available for delegates
outside the room.

Thank you

ENDS

