ITALY
2017 NPT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
CLUSTER II ISSUES

GENERAL
STATEMENT BY
H.E. AMBASSADOR VINICIO MATI

PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

(VIENNA, 8 MAY 2017)

C heck against delivery

Mr. Chair,
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union. I would like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.

*******
Mr. Chair,
Italy remains fully committed to effective multilateral action against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Despite the efforts made, the existence of proliferation programmes
and networks, the difficulty of securing sensitive materials and the risk that terrorists might get
access to them remain major challenges to deal with.
[n this regard, let me reiterate once again the centrality of the NPT as the cornerstone of the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime, as well as the necessity to promote its universalisation and
strengthen its implementation.
The IAEA's system of safeguards is a fundamental component of the nuclear nonproliferation regime and plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. Italy
supports the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
together with Additional Protocols constitute the current verification standard and Italy continues to
call for their universalization without delay.
Italy has firmly supported the continued evolution of safeguards as exemplified by the
development of the State-level Concept (SLC), and its consistent and universal implementation.

*******
Mr. Chair,
We highly appreciate the contribution made by multilateral export control regimes to the
goal of preventing proliferation.
We also underscore the importance of confidence and security building measures in
contributing to the global efforts to curb proli feration risks. In this vein, we support the Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation as a widely subscribed multilateral instrument that
aims at delegitimizing ballistic missile proli feration.

*******
Mr. Chair,
Italy supports the inalienable right of all States Parties to the NPT to benefit from the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This right should be exercised according to the highest standards of
safeguards, safety and security, to which we attach the utmost importance. Strengthening nuclear
security is a priority for us. We highly value the global dialogue on this topic in different fora.

*******
Mr. Chair,

2

Italy remains deeply concerned by the increasing risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-state actors, particularly in relation to terrorist acts.
In this respect, we support the strengthening of the 1540 Committee mechanism to increase
national capacities in the implementation of non-proliferation measures, and we welcome the
positive outcome of the Review of the UN Resolution 1540 regime last year, as embodied in UN
Security Council resolution n. 2325.
We reiterate our support for the universal and full implementation of all relevant
international instruments. In particular, we underline the importance of the International Convention
on the Suppression of Acts on Nuclear Terrorism and we encourage all States to become Party to
this Agreement and to comply fully with its provisions.
Italy deeply values the entry into force of the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, as it enhances the scope of the Convention and expands
cooperation among States in countering the risk of nuclear terrorism. Thus, it represents an essential
step in strengthening nuclear security. We encourage urge the States Parties to the Convention that
have not already done so to promptly ratify the Amendment.
In this field, we actively support some concrete, operational initiatives. Last November, for
example, we hosted in Rome a meeting of the Nuclear Forensic Working Group of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and a table top exercise in the framework of the
Proli feration Security Initiative.
Thank you, M r. Chair.

3

