2018 NPT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
CLUSTER II ISSUES

GENERAL
STATEMENT BY
H.E. AMBASSADOR GIANFRANCO INCARNATO

PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

(GENEVA, 27 APRIL 2018)

Check against delivery

Mr. Chair,
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union. I would like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.
*******
Mr. Chair,
Italy remains fully committed to effective multilateral action against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Despite the efforts made, the existence of proliferation programmes
and networks, the difficulty of securing sensitive materials and the risk that terrorists might get
access to them remain major challenges to deal with.
In this regard, let me reiterate once again the centrality of the NPT as the cornerstone of the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime, as well as the necessity to promote its universalisation and
strengthen its implementation.
The IAEA’s system of safeguards is a fundamental component of the nuclear nonproliferation regime and plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. Italy
supports the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
together with Additional Protocols constitute the current verification standard and Italy continues to
call for their universalization without delay.
Italy has firmly supported the continued evolution of safeguards as exemplified by the
development of the State-level Concept (SLC), and its consistent and universal implementation.
*******
Mr. Chair,
We highly appreciate the contribution made by multilateral export control regimes to the
goal of preventing proliferation.
We also underscore the importance of confidence and security building measures in
contributing to the global efforts to curb proliferation risks. In this vein, we support the Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and continue to encourage its universalisation.
*******
Mr. Chair,
Italy supports the inalienable right of all States Parties to the NPT to benefit from the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This right should be exercised according to the highest standards of
safeguards, safety and security, to which we attach the utmost importance. Strengthening nuclear
security is a priority for us. We highly value the global dialogue on this topic in different fora.
*******

2

Mr. Chair,
Italy remains deeply concerned by the increasing risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-state actors, particularly in relation to terrorist acts.
In this respect, we support the strengthening of the 1540 Committee mechanism to increase
national capacities in the implementation of non-proliferation measures, and we stress the need to
build upon the positive outcome of the Review of the UN Resolution 1540 regime, as embodied in
UN Security Council resolution n. 2325.
We reiterate our support for the universal and full implementation of all relevant
international instruments. In particular, we underline the importance of the International Convention
on the Suppression of Acts on Nuclear Terrorism and we encourage all States to become Party to
this Agreement and to comply fully with its provisions.
Italy deeply values the entry into force of the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, as it enhances the scope of the Convention and expands
cooperation among States in countering the risk of nuclear terrorism. Thus, it represents an essential
step in strengthening nuclear security. We encourage the States Parties to the Convention that have
not already done so to promptly ratify the Amendment.
In this field, we actively support some concrete, operational initiatives. For example, we will
organize in September 2018 an exercise in the framework of the Mediterranean Initiative of the
Proliferation Security Initiative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.

3

Mr. Chair,
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union. I would like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. Chair,
Italy recognizes the progresses made so far in addressing proliferation risks. At the same
time, we remain seriously concerned by the existence of proliferation programs and networks. The
difficulty of securing sensitive materials and the risk that terrorists might get access to them remain
major challenges to deal with.
The nuclear and ballistic missile programs of the DPRK remain a source of extreme
concern. Italy condemns in the strongest terms the DPRK’s ballistic missile and nuclear tests, which
clearly violate its international obligations and represent an increasing threat to regional and
international security, peace and the global non-proliferation regime. While highly welcoming
ongoing diplomatic efforts to reach a peaceful solution, we reiterate our expectation of a complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization through meaningful negotiations.
To this end it is instrumental to continue to exert maximum pressure on the DPRK, also
through the thorough implementation of the sanction regime: the cohesion and determination of the
international community remain essential.
*******
Mr. Chair,
We are all aware that we have to face serious proliferation crises. At the same time, let me
acknowledge that also in this complex field, the international community has demonstrated that
peaceful and effective solutions can be found – and have to be found.
In this vein, let me remind the landmark success represented by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPoA) between the E3/EU+3 and Iran, as an extremely valuable achievement in
the context of the international efforts aimed at strengthening the overall non-proliferation
architecture in accordance with the NPT. Italy highly values the JCPoA and welcomes the
confirmation by IAEA in successive reports of Iran’s continued compliance with its provisions. We
believe that the international community should continue to take every action to ensure that the
JCPoA continues to provide benefits for all and remains a success story. The full implementation of
the JCPoA and of all provisions of UN Security Council Resolution 2231 can foster international
and regional security.
*******
Mr. Chair,
Italy highly values the importance of nuclear-weapon-free zones for peace and security, in
accordance with the 1999 UN Disarmament Commission guidelines. We therefore commend the
contribution of existing nuclear-weapon-free zones to attaining these goals, and call on nuclearweapon States to sign and ratify the relevant protocols of the Treaties establishing such zones.
Because of its geopolitical position, Italy is part of the wider Mediterranean area and very
close to the Middle East. Our history is intimately connected to this Region. We are very sensitive
2

to developments in this context also from the point of view of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and we follow them very closely.
We reaffirm our strong commitment to a successful outcome of the process leading to the
full implementation of the 1995 NPT Review Conference Resolution on the Middle East, and the
related practical steps endorsed by the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
Thus, Italy reiterates its support to the convening of a Conference on the establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and all other Weapons of Mass Destruction - to be
attended by all States of the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by them - as
decided by the 2010 Review Conference.
In this perspective, we continue to call on all States in the region, which have not yet done
so, to accede to the NPT, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention, to sign and ratify the CTBT, and to conclude a Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement, the Additional Protocol and, as applicable, a modified Small Quantities Protocol with
the IAEA.

Thank you, Mr. Chair.

3


