(check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR MITSURU KITANO，
AMBASSADOR, PERMANENT MISSION OF JAPAN TO THE
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA

FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

- CLUSTER II VIENNA, 8 MAY 2017

Mr. Chairman,

The NPT regime has been facing serious challenges which could undermine our
confidence in the NPT. In this regard, robust non-proliferation efforts by the
international community as a whole are imperative. To this end, Japan supports the
strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system and of export controls as well as other
related mechanisms.

Mr. Chairman,

North Korea’s nuclear and missile related activities are clear violations of the relevant
United Nations Security Council Resolutions and the September 2005 Joint Statement
of the Six-Party Talks. They represent a grave challenge to the global non-proliferation
and disarmament regime centered on the NPT. Japan condemns North Korea’s ongoing
nuclear related activities in the strongest terms. We reaffirm the strong demand for
North Korea to retract its announcement of withdrawal from the NPT and to return, at
the earliest date, to the NPT and to IAEA safeguards.

Japan will continue to support the JCPOA, which strengthens the international
non-proliferation regime and the stability of the Middle East region. We will continue to
contribute towards the steady implementation of the JCPOA.

Japan remains convinced that the establishment of a Middle East WMD free zone would
contribute to the progress in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as well as the
strengthening of regional and global peace and security. We strongly hope to see
progress in the dialogue on this issue. The Japanese delegation will make a separate

statement on this important issue on Tuesday.

Mr. Chairman,

Japan is firmly determined to promote various endeavors to further strengthen the
IAEA Safeguards system which is a fundamental component of the international
non-proliferation regime.

Stressing that

the universalization of additional protocol is well in progress, we believe

that the Model Additional Protocol, along with a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement,
should be the safeguards standard of the NPT as required by article III, paragraph 1 of
the Treaty. In this context, Japan again urges all States that have not yet concluded
both a comprehensive safeguards agreement, an additional protocol, and where relevant,
the modified Small Quantities Protocols, to do so as soon as possible. Japan will
continuously strive to enhance its assistance to other States in their efforts to conclude
an additional protocol by sharing our knowledge and experiences.

Japan would also like to call on all supplier States to consider the application of the
safeguards standard including an additional protocol by recipient countries as the
condition of supplying nuclear material, equipment and technology.

At the same time, Japan would like to call for a wider application of safeguards for
peaceful nuclear facilities in the nuclear-weapon states, and call on them to declare all
fissile material no longer required for military purposes to the IAEA.

All States should provide all political, technical and financial support to the IAEA so

that it is able to maintain capabilities to fully discharge its responsibilities in an
effective and efficient manner.

Mr. Chairman,

Export controls play a critical role in meeting the nuclear non-proliferation obligations
prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT. Given the increasingly diversified
and sophisticated illicit procurement activities, all States should further strengthen
national export controls including catch-all and intangible technology transfer controls.

Japan further encourages State parties to adhere to the Nuclear Suppliers Group
Guidelines and the Zangger Committee Trigger List. The guidelines provide a standard
for export controls and as such, all States should once again recognize the usefulness of
these guidelines as measures for non-proliferation. Japan will cooperate with other
partners for the universalization of these guidelines.

Japan strongly believes that enhancing the implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 is imperative, especially the obligations on export
controls. In this regard, Japan welcomes the adoption of UNSCR 2325 which calls upon
all States that have not done so to start developing effective national control lists at the
earliest opportunity.

Japan will continue to actively assist other States, especially in Asia, to strengthen their
export control systems including through the Asian Export Control Seminar held
annually in Japan since 1993, as well as through the enhancement of the
implementation of UNSCR 1540.

Mr. Chairman,

Each state should maintain at all times effective and comprehensive security of all
nuclear and radioactive material under its control. Japan welcomes the recent
significant developments in strengthening global nuclear security architecture. We
further encourage States to take proactive actions, including, responding to emerging
threats such as cyberattacks and insider threats, and, to promote the universalization of
international instruments such as the Amendment to the CPPNM and ICSANT.

Japan has offered various contributions to the international efforts to enhance nuclear
security through capacity building. We will redouble our efforts in partnership with
international organizations, including the IAEA, and initiatives, which play a central
role in nuclear security. As part of such efforts, Japan will hold the plenary meeting of
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in June.
Also, the Government of Japan will intensify its efforts to combat nuclear terrorism in
the run-up to the 2020 Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games and other major public
events.

Thank you.

