The IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental pillar of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. Japan attaches great importance to strengthening the effectiveness of the IAEA safeguards by maximizing the authority and capability of the IAEA
We are witnessing extremely regrettable challenges to the non-proliferation regime such as the DPRK's proclaimed nuclear test, and Iran's continued nuclear activities without international community's confidence. While the international community has been taking steps to deal with such challenges, States Parties have consistently endeavored to strengthen the IAEA safeguards system which is a key and essential component of the NPT.
In this respect, Japan reminds all States Parties that the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference recommends, among others, the consideration of ways and means to promote and facilitate the conclusion and entry into force of comprehensive safeguards agreements and additional protocols^ and welcomes the efforts made by the IAEA to develop the "Plan of Action to Promote the Conclusion of Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols", last updated in September 2007 to seek the universal adherence to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol.
The universalization of the Additional Protocol is the most realistic and effective way to strengthen the current non-proliferation regime. It can play a pivotal role in increasing the transparency of States' nuclear related activities by providing the IAEA with the enhanced verification ability to assure not only the non-diversion of declared nuclear material but also the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities. Japan believes that IAEA safeguards, reinforced by universal adherence to the Additional Protocol, should constitute the NPT safeguards standards as required by paragraph 1 of Article m of the NPT. Japan therefore calls on all States Parties to the NPT that have not yet done so to conclude additional protocols without further delay.
For its part, Japan has been actively taking initiatives, in cooperation with the IAEA and like-minded countries, to universalize the Additional Protocol. Japan has
contributed to a series of IAEA seminars, which resulted in shared awareness on the importance of the Additional Protocol and the steady increase in the number of countries that have signed/ concluded an additional protocol in recent years. Last year, Japan supported and participated in the IAEA safeguards regional seminar held in Sydney, Australia, the National Seminar on Additional Protocol held in Hanoi, Vietnam, and the IAEA Regional Technical Meeting on Additional Protocol Implementation in Asia and the Pacific Region held in Sydney.
Japan has been also hosting the Asian Senior-level Talks on Non-proliferation (ASTOP) since 2003. In the fifth ASTOP meeting held last month, the importance of universalization of the Additional Protocol was shared among the participants and active discussions took place on the efforts of Asian countries for conclusion and domestic implementation of the Additional Protocol. Since 2004, Japan has participated in the G-8 joint demarche for universalization of the Additional Protocol worldwide. This year, Japan, as G8 Chair, intends to further promote such efforts.
Furthermore, to support the IAEA's non-proliferation activities and to strengthen its verification capability, Japan made an additional contribution (€ 6.91 million) to the IAEA Fund for Non-Proliferation this year. Through this contribution, Japan intends to assist those countries which are determined to achieve maximum transparency with respect to their nuclear activities and the highest level of safeguards standard including the Additional Protocol.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan recognizes the importance of advancing integrated safeguards with a view to maximizing the effectiveness and the efficiency of the IAEA's safeguards activities within available resources, given the limited safeguards resources and ever-growing verification needs. Japan encourages the IAEA to take necessary steps to strengthen integrated safeguards approaches. Japan reminds all States Parties that the introduction of integrated safeguards in a State requires sincere implementation of its comprehensive safeguards agreement as well as its additional protocol.
Moreover, strengthening the non-proliferation regime is a matter which should also involve non-States Parties to the NPT. Given the imminent importance of enhancing non-proliferation, Japan calls upon non-States Parties to place all nuclear material under IAEA safeguards and conclude an additional protocol.
The role of export controls, as required by paragraph 2 of the Article IH of the NPT, is crucial to achieving nuclear non-proliferation. The multinational export control regimes for nuclear related materials, equipment and technology, namely the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), have been playing an important role in this respect.
Japan urges those States Parties that have not yet done so to establish and implement appropriate effective national rules and regulations on export controls over both nuclear and nuclear-related dual-use items, based on the Zangger Committee Understandings and the NSG Guidelines.
As called upon by the previous NPT Review Conferences, the Zangger Committee and the NSG have been actively engaged in outreach activities to help States Parties better understand the activities of these regimes and also establish adequate domestic export control laws and regulations.
As a leading country in the area of export controls, Japan has been promoting increased awareness about the importance of efficient and effective export controls in Asia. We also work towards strengthening the export control systems in our region, by dispatching experts, providing grant aid, and holding seminars.
Japan believes that these multinational export control regimes can play an even more crucial role in assisting the States Parties in establishing and implementing appropriate effective national laws and regulations with regard to export controls, as required by the UNSCR 1540 and other relevant UNSC resolutions.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan would like to highlight again the importance of the UN Security Council Resolution 1540 as a tool in support for the NPT regime. It provides the international community with a basis to tackle the threat of WMD proliferation posed by non-state actors. In this context Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of UNSR 1810 last month, which extended the mandate of the 1540 Committee. Japan has taken a lead
in ensuring the effective implementation of the resolution in the international community. This year, Japan, as G8 chair, will make its utmost efforts to further promote the implementation of the resolution by all States in close coordination with the 1540 Committee.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan supports establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the regions concerned and on (he condition that the establishment of such zones would contribute to regional stability and security. In this regard, the lack of progress in the establishment of a weapons-of-mass-destruction-free-zone in the Middle East poses a serious concern. Japan supported, and continues to fully support, the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East, which calls for the establishment of an effectively verifiable Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction, nuclear, chemical and biological, and their delivery systems. Furthermore Japan supports all the relevant UN General Assembly resolutions concerning the nuclear-weapon-free zone including the resolution on a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
Thank you very much.