DELEGATION OF JAPAN TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
3, chemin des Fins-PO. Box 133 - 1211 GENEVA 19-5witzerland
Tel. +41 (0)22 717 3444-Fax+41 (0)22 7883818
Website: www.disarm.emb-japan.gojp

(Please check against delivery)

Statement by H.E. Mr. Mitsuru Kitano
Ambassador, Director-General of the Disarmament,
Non-Proliferation and Science Department,
Minitry of Foreign Affairs of Japan

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
- Cluster II -

Geneva, 26 April 2013

Mr. Chairman,
At the last NPT Review Conference in 2010, it was recognized that the
inalienable right of all the parties to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes constitutes one of the fundamental
objectives of the Treaty. At the same time, to our deep regret, the challenges
of nuclear proliferation continue to persist, or even have become more
prominent, in several regions. This being the case, Japan believes that
robust non·proliferation efforts by the international community as a whole
are imperative so that we can promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
while minimizing the threats posed by nuclear proliferation. To this end,
Japan supports the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards system and of
export controls as well as regional efforts to establish nuclear-weapon·free
zones.
Mr. Chairman,
The lAEA safeguards system is the fundamental element of the global
non·proliferation regime. It underpins the international security
environment and provides the basis for nuclear cooperation. Japan will
continue to promote the universalization of comprehensive safeguards
agreements and additional protocols. The full implementation of these
instruments will provide credible assurances regarding a country's nuclear
activities, and thus enhance transparency and build confidence.
Japan, recalling Actions 28 and 29 agreed to at the last NPT Review
Conference in 2010, welcomes the fact that the number of states with an
additional protocol in force increased from 101 to 119 during the three years
since that Conference. Japan highly values the efforts made by the IAEA in
this regard. This trend of wider adherence to additional protocols makes it
more convincing that the lAEA safeguards reinforced by the additional
protocol should be the safeguards standard in accordance with paragraph 1
of Article III of the NPT. In this connection and mindful of Action 37, Japan
calls on all states to apply this safeguards standard (i.e. a comprehensive
safeguards agreement reinforced by an additional protocol) as a condition for
supplying nuclear material, equipment and technology to a recipient country,
and to incorporate this condition in their civil nuclear cooperation
agreements.

1

Japan will continue to actively assist other states in their efforts to conclude
additional protocols by sharing our knowledge and experience and by
working together with the IAEA and other states.
Japan, recalling Action 30 of the last Review Conference, supports the widest
possible application of IAEA safeguards to peaceful nuclear facilities in the
nuclear weapon states to ensure irreversible and verifiable removal of
nuclear material designated by them as no longer required for military
purposes. Japan is committed to the working paper on this matter submitted
to this Prep Com by the NPDI (Non·Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative) and welcomes other states supporting the elements of this
working paper.
Japan considers it imperative that, as agreed in Action 33 of the last NPT
Review Conference, all States provide support to the IAEA so that the IAEA
is able to maintain sufficient capabilities to fully discharge its
responsibilities in an effective and efficient manner.
Mr. Chairman,
Export controls playa critical role in meeting the nuclear non·proliferation
obligations prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT. Given the
necessity of counter-terrorism measures and the increasing complexity of
illicit procurement activities, the strengthening of export control systems has
become an urgent matter for all of us. In this context, Japan urges all State
parties to establish and implement effective export controls to prevent the
illicit transfer of nuclear and nuclear-related dual· use materials, equipment
and tangible as well as intangible technologies. Japan will continue to
actively assist other states in their efforts to strengthen export control
systems through information sharing and capacity building activities such as
the Asian Export Control Seminar held annually in Japan since 1993.
Japan, recalling Action 36 of the last NPT Review Conference, encourages
State parties to refer to, and align with, the multilaterally negotiated and
agreed-upon guidelines and understandings on export controls. Japan is of
the view that states that utilize and align with existing guidelines such as
the Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines and the Zangger Committee Trigger
List, actually find merit in enhancing their export transparency and
competitiveness.
2

Japan supports the practical steps set forth in the working paper on export
controls submitted to this Prep Com by the NPDI and welcomes other states
supporting the elements of this working paper.
Mr. Chairman,
Ensuring proactive cooperation among all State parties is a key element in
effectively countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including proliferation to non' state actors. To this end, Japan wishes to
highlight the importance of fully implementing United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1540, and will continue to support its smooth
implementation through the work of the UNSCR 1540 committee, and
through engagement in various regional seminars and workshops.
Mr. Chairman,
Regarding the establishment of further nuclear-weapon 'free zones, as called
for in Action 9 of the 2010 NPT Final Document, Japan believes that this
should be pursued on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among
States of the region concerned, and in accordance with the 1999 Guidelines
of the United Nations Disarmament Commission. The establishment of such
zones, where appropriate, would contribute to nuclear disarmament,
non'proliferation and global and regional peace and security. Japan hopes
that all nuclear weapon states that have not yet done so make every effort to
sign and ratify the protocols of existing treaties on nuclear-weapon'free
zones.
Japan also supports the Resolution on the Middle East and efforts made by
Ambassador Jaakko Laajava, the facilitator for the conference on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction. The Japanese delegation will make a separate
statement on this important issue on Monday.
Thank you.
II

3

