(check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR MITSURU KITANO,
AMBASSADOR, PERMANENT MISSION OF JAPAN TO THE
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA

SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

- CLUSTER II Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Geneva, 30th April 2018

Mr. Chairman,
Serious nuclear challenges posed by North Korea are another acute
reminder that it is necessary to strengthen the NPT regime today. Robust
non-proliferation efforts by the whole international community contribute
to this end.
North Korea’s nuclear and missile program poses a grave challenge to the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
A nuclear armed North Korea is not, and, will never be accepted. On 27
April, ROK and North Korea announced “the Panmunjeom Declaration for
Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula” at the end of
Inter-Korean Summit. Japan welcomes a positive development for
denuclearization and strongly hopes that this will lead to North Korea’s
concrete actions to dismantle its all weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles. In this context, Japan urges North Korea to sign and
ratify the CTBT to solidify its commitment and will keep a watchful eye on
the situation through the US-NK summit to be held within couple of
weeks.
In this connection, I must emphasize that Complete, Verifiable, and
Irreversible Dismantlement, CVID, of all weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles in North Korea is critical. To achieve CVID, the
international community as a whole must maintain the maximum
pressure campaign against North Korea. In order to realize the CVID,
strict verification is also imperative. Cooperative action by the
international society is needed more than ever.
Mr. Chairman,
On the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), we believe that it
contributes to strengthening the international non-proliferation regime
centered on the NPT and the stability of the Middle East region. Its
continued and full implementation is crucial.
With respect to these important regional issues, my delegation would like
to make further remarks at the Specific Issue.
Mr. Chairman,

I would like to stress that IAEA Safeguards are the fundamental
component of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. Japan
continues to support the IAEA’s work to make it more effective and
efficient.
Steady implementation of safeguards is the fundamental obligation of
respective States and it is essential in ensuring transparency and
sustainability of their nuclear activities. Japan remains committed to the
implementation of safeguards in good faith as a responsible state.
We welcome the increase in the number of States with the Additional
Protocol based on its model. The number of States with the AP has
increased by about 40 since 2010. This figure clearly indicates that there is
recognition in the international community that the AP is indispensable
for securing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
I would also like to point out that Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement
(CSA) and the AP should be recognized as the verification standard under
the NPT. Japan believes that the universalization of the AP is one of the
most important goals in strengthening the effectiveness and improving the
efficiency of IAEA Safeguards.
In this respect, we believe it remains our key objective to increase the
number of States with the CSA and AP as well as the modified Small
Quantity Protocols to the CSA, where applicable. To this end, we
emphasize the importance of promoting international cooperation and
collaboration among related countries including through capacity building
aiming at the universalization of the AP.
At the same time, Japan calls for a wider application of safeguards for
civil nuclear facilities in the nuclear-weapon States, and call on them to
declare to the IAEA all fissile materials no longer required for military
purposes.
I would also like to mention that Japan supports “the Symposium on
International Safeguards” which is held every four years at the IAEA. The
next one is scheduled to take place November this year.
Mr. Chairman,

Export controls play a critical role in meeting the nuclear non-proliferation
obligations prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT. Given the
increasingly diversified and sophisticated illicit procurement activities, all
States should further strengthen national export controls including catchall and intangible technology transfer controls.
Japan further encourages States parties to adhere to the Nuclear
Suppliers Group Guidelines and the Zangger Committee Trigger List. The
guidelines provide a standard for export controls and as such, all States
should once again recognize the usefulness of these guidelines as measures
for non-proliferation. Japan will cooperate with other partners for the
universalization of these guidelines.
Japan strongly believes that enhancing the implementation of United
Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1540 is imperative,
especially the obligations on export controls. In this regard, Japan
welcomes the adoption of UNSCR 2325, which calls upon all States that
have not yet done so to start developing effective national control lists at
the earliest opportunity.
In light of North Korea’s development of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic missiles, it is important that we do not allow
any “loopholes” in the export control systems. Introduction of
comprehensive domestic export control system and its firm
implementation by each state is the key. Japan will continue to actively
assist other States, especially in Asia, to strengthen their export control
systems including through the Asian Export Control Seminar held
annually in Japan since 1993, as well as through the enhancement of the
implementation of UNSCR 1540.
Mr. Chairman,
Each State should maintain at all times effective and comprehensive
security of all nuclear and radioactive material under its control.
Japan welcomes the recent significant developments in strengthening
global nuclear security architecture.
While recognizing the responsibility rests on each State to ensure nuclear
security domestically, we further encourage States to take proactive
actions, including, responses to emerging threats such as cyberattacks and

insider threats, and, promoting the conclusion of relevant international
instruments such as Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear
Materials (CPPNM) and its Amendment, and International Convention on
Suppression of Act of Nuclear Terrorism (ICS/ANT).
Japan has offered various contributions to the international efforts to
enhance nuclear security, particularly through the IAEA, which plays a
central role in this respect. Nuclear security, together with nuclear safety,
is an important foundation for sustainable use of nuclear energy for the
peaceful purposes. We believe capacity-building is a key element, and we
should pursue a positive approach which generates synergy and positive
linkage between measures for strengthening security and promoting the
peaceful uses.
Lastly, I wish to highlight two recent developments related to nuclear
security. First, the Government of Japan will intensify its efforts to
combat nuclear terrorism in the 2020 Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic
Games and other major public events. In this connection, this February,
upon Foreign Minister Kono’s visit to Vienna, Japan and the IAEA signed
the Practical Arrangements on Nuclear Security Cooperation for the Tokyo
2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games.
Second, as part of our efforts on facilitating international cooperation,
Japan held the plenary meeting of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism in June 2017 in Tokyo. In this meeting, fruitful discussion was
conducted among approximately 220 high level government officials from
74 countries and 4 international organizations.
Japan is determined to advance the international cooperation to
strengthen nuclear security.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Mr. Chairman,
Today, we are faced with grave situation in some regions, posing serious
challenges to the NPT regime. Japan strongly emphasizes the significant
role played by the NPT in promoting regional security.
Mr. Chairman,
North Korea’s nuclear and missile program poses grave challenges to the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
North Korea’s moves toward dialogue from their side are the outcome of
the international community’s coordinated efforts of the maximum
pressure campaign against North Korea.
On 27 April, ROK and North Korea announced “the Panmunjeom
Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula”
at the end of the Inter-Korean summit. Japan welcomes a positive
development for denuclearization and strongly hopes that this will lead to
North Korea’s concrete actions to dismantle its all weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missiles. At the same time, we need to urge North
Korea to do more than what was announced. We demand North Korea to
sign and ratify the CTBT, as well.
Based upon our past experiences, it is important not to ease pressures at a
wrong timing. To achieve Complete, Verifiable, and Irreversible
Dismantlement, CVID, of all weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missiles in North Korea, the international community as a whole must
maintain the maximum pressure campaign against North Korea. At the
same time, taking advantage of such occasions as summit meeting between
US and North Korea, we need to urge North Korea to take concrete
actions.
A nuclear armed North Korea is not, and will never be accepted. Nor North
Korea shall never be recognized as a nuclear-weapon State under the NPT.
We strongly demand that North Korea immediately come into full
compliance with the NPT and the IAEA safeguards.
With regard to verification of nuclear materials and facilities, the IAEA,
with its long accumulated expertise in this field, has a central role to play.
Thus, Japan, together with countries concerned, stands ready to closely

cooperate with the IAEA, which could mobilize its knowledge and
experiences towards the denuclearization of North Korea.
Mr. Chairman,
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) contributes to
strengthening the international non-proliferation regime centered on the
NPT and the stability of the Middle East region. Its continued and full
implementation is important.
The IAEA plays a significant role in terms of verification and monitoring of
the implementation of the JCPOA. Broad support from the international
community is crucial, and Japan will continue to support the IAEA in
performing its vital role.
As for the issue of the launching of ballistic missile by Iran, we hope that it
will be resolved through the consultations among related countries.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan remains convinced that the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction would
contribute to the progress in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as
well as the strengthening of regional and global peace and security.
It is important for the whole NPT community to realize the conference
attended by all States of the Middle East.
Towards a successful outcome at the 2020 NPT Review Conference, it is
imperative to pursue the progress of discussions on this issue.
We acknowledge the League of Arab States has discussed this issue
actively. It is our sincere hope that efforts by the states in the region will
be conducive to its advancement of dialogue.
We expect the 3 co-conveners to exert their leadership. We also recognize
the important role played by the United Nations. At the same time, we
emphasize that the entire NPT community should proactively engage in
this issue, considering the impact of this issue to the NPT regime.
Mr. Chairman,

On South Asia, Japan continues to urge India and Pakistan to accede to
the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without conditions.
We also continue to urge both States to maintain their commitments to the
moratorium on nuclear tests, and to take concrete actions towards signing
and ratifying the CTBT.
Japan also urges Pakistan to agree on a programme of work for the
Conference on Disarmament including on the immediate commencement of
negotiations on an FMCT.
Thank you.

