2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Statement by
THE REPUBLIC OF LATVIA
at the
Main Committee II
New York, 5 May 2015

Mr Chairman,
At the outset I would like to congratulate you on your election as the
Chairman of the Main Committee II. Let me assure you of the full
support and cooperation of my delegation.
Latvia aligns itself with the intervention made on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to add the following points in a national capacity.
Mr Chairman,
Latvia underlines the equal importance of all three pillars of the NPT. We
believe these pillars are tightly interlinked and progress or the opposite in
one of the pillars will affect the other two. Thus, implementation of nonproliferation initiatives not only curbs the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, but also has a positive impact on the strategic stability
necessary for proceeding with disarmament. It also gives confidence that
States do not exploit their rights to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes.
The 2010 NPT Action Plan addresses the necessary actions in all three
pillars in a balanced and comprehensive way. We believe the continued
implementation of these actions is necessary.

Latvia would like to underline the importance of regional approaches –
establishment of nuclear weapon free zones – in strengthening global
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. In this regard we
welcome the signing of the Protocol to the Central Asia Nuclear Weapon
Free Zone Treaty by the P5 in 2014.
Latvia fully supports the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East. We would like to commend the efforts by
the Facilitator, as well as the co-conveners to fulfil the steps agreed in this
regard in the 2010 NPT Review Conference. The work done so far should
not be taken for granted. We hope that it is possible to find a way-forward
acceptable to all Parties, which would enable convening the Conference
as soon as possible.
Mr Chairman,
As many speakers before, I would like to touch upon the negotiations on
the Iranian nuclear program. The achievements in the E3+3 and Iran
talks, specifically the agreement on parameters reached on 2 April in
Lausanne, demonstrate that security challenges can be successfully
addressed through diplomatic engagement, in strict adherence with
international norms. The ongoing efforts of the E3+3 and Iran are
certainly good news for the NPT, as they reassure us that the global nonproliferation regime, based on the NPT, is still vital and credible.
Latvia sincerely hopes that the parties, involved in the talks, will continue
negotiations in good faith and will persistently move towards the final
agreement until the 30 June. Latvia is confident that this is the only
sustainable way to ensure that Iran’s nuclear program is developed for
exclusively peaceful purposes. For this reason Latvia has made a
voluntary contribution to IAEA verification activities in Iran under the
Joint plan of Action.

Mr Chairman,
Since retreating from the NPT in 2003, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK) has created grave security concerns in the Southeast
Asia region and beyond. We cannot but reiterate our strong concern about
the ongoing development of the DPRK’s nuclear and missile programs.
The actions of the DPRK are in violation of the boundaries clearly
identified by the United Nations Security Council.
We support the efforts of the international community addressing the
challenges posed by the DPRK’s nuclear and missile programs. In this
regard we call on North Korea to comply with its international
obligations and to take the necessary steps towards restarting a
denuclearization dialogue. One of the possible dialogue formats could be
the once beneficial Six Party talks, which have been halted since 2009.
Mr Chairman,
As my last point I would like to underline the need to strengthen our
understanding on how to respond effectively to a State Party’s withdrawal
from the NPT. A number of working documents have been prepared by
various groups of States on the Article X, including the one submitted to
this Review Conference, which Latvia co-sponsors. We believe it will
serve as a solid base for further discussions. We hope that an agreement
can be found on a way-forward to prevent the use of the withdrawal
provisions of the NPT with aim to avoid accountability.
Thank you!

