STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR DATO' MUHAMMAD SHAHRUL IKRAM YAAKOB
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS, VIENNA AT
THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 2, (SAFEGUARDS) OF THE
FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW
CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
VlENNA.30 APRIL - 11 MAY 2012

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia recognizes the IAEA's invaluable contribution in establishing and promulgating
effective safeguards and verification mechanisms for peaceful uses of nuclear energy. As
a signatory to the NPT and a Member State of the IAEA, Malaysia reaffirms its
commitment to non-proliferation. We also reaffirm the centrality of the IAEA in nuclear
safeguards and verifications. In this regard, we call upon all Member States to abide by
their safeguards obligations.

2.

The fundamental principles underlying the right to activities related to the peaceful

uses of nuclear energy are ensuring the peaceful nature of the nuclear activities is not
abused. States must exercise full transparency in nuclear programmes, subject those
programmes to the full scope of the IAEA's safeguards and verification, and adhere to the
provisions of the NPT. The Additional Protocol can provide an important tool to the IAEA
for enhanced verification.

3.

However, States Parties will also require assurances that the extended information

and access given under the Additional Protocol be held in confidence by the IAEA. The
IAEA should be provided with the necessary resources and the space to discharge its
mandated activities in an effective and objective manner. We see a need for the IAEA to
enhance rules and modalities on preserving the confidentiality of safeguards related
information.

8

4.

Malaysia wishes to reiterate its commitment to fully implement its obligations under

the NPT Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA. We welcome safeguards inspection at the
country's sole research reactor facility - the TRlGA MARK I1 PUSPATI. As an undertaking
to ensure transparency, besides continuing to provide access to the non-Material Balance
Areas (MBA) for safeguards inspections we had also provided the IAEA with voluntary
declarations of the type required under Article 2 of the Additional Protocol. We are
currently in the final stages of revising our domestic nuclear legislation, and this would
allow us to ratify the Additional Protocol, amongst others.
Mr. Chairman,

5.

Nuclear security is important. Countries need to continue to work together in

advancing nuclear security, requesting and providing assistance as necessary; working at
the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels for the promotion of nuclear security culture
through technology development, human resource development, education, and training.
There is a need for cooperation among States to effectively prevent and respond to
incidents of illicit nuclear trafficking; and agree to share, subject to respective national
laws and procedures, information and expertise through bilateral and multilateral
mechanisms in relevant areas such as nuclear detection, forensics, law enforcement, and
the development of new technologies.

6.

In this regard, we support the implementation of strong nuclear security practices

including export control systems that will not infringe upon the rights of States to develop
and utilize nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and technology and will facilitate
international cooperation in the field of nuclear security. We believe maintaining effective
nuclear security will require continuous national efforts facilitated by international
cooperation and undertaken on a voluntary basis by States.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

