Please check agains~

y

STATEMENT BY MR. AMIR HAMZAH MOHD NASIR
REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
CLUSTER 2: REGIONAL ISSUES
OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA, 30 APRIL - 1 MAY 2018

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia associates itself with the statement of the Non-Aligned
Movement States Parties to the NPT on Cluster II issues, as delivered
earlier by Indonesia.

Mr. Chairman,

2.

Malaysia wishes to stress the role of the IAEA as the sole

competent authority responsible for establishing effective safeguards
and verification mechanisms to ensure that nuclear energy is used for
peaceful purposes. In this regard, States Parties should ensure that they
are in full compliance with IAEA safeguards and verification in line with
1

provisions under the NPT. Malaysia believes that full adherence to
safeguards and verification mechanisms will foster mutual trust and
confidence amongst States and contributes significantly to peace and
1

security within regions and globally.

1

3.

To date, the ongoing implementation of the Joint Comprehensive

Plan of Action (JCPOA) between Iran and the P5+1 on Iran's nuclear
programme is an example of the successful implementation of
safeguards and verification. The JCPOA highlights the importance of
IAEA safeguards as a fundamental component to nuclear nonproliferation as well as its indispensable role in the implementation of the
NPT. Malaysia believes that such mechanisms should be retained or
further improved to ensure States remain in full compliance with their
safeguards

obligations,

thus

boosting

confidence

among

the

international community.

4.

Malaysia welcomes the desire expressed by the Democratic

People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) towards denuclearising the Korean
Peninsula, and welcomes the hosting of the inter-Korean summit as well
as the dialogue between DPRK leader Kim Jong-un and United States
President Donald Trump. Malaysia hopes that both meetings will be
followed by concrete actions towards the dismantling of the DPRK
nuclear weapons programme. In this regard, Malaysia calls upon States
to support efforts that will facilitate the DPRK's return to the NPT and put
into effect the necessary safeguards and verification processes.

2

Mr. Chairman ,

5.

Malaysia underscores the implementation of robust measures in

enhancing

nuclear security, which may include establishing

export

control mechanisms and other necessary legislation. It is also important
for such measures to adapt to the dynamically-evolving
proliferation

nature of

activities, and at the same time does not impede the

development and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. To this
effect, Malaysia enacted the Strategic Trade Act 2010 (STA 2010) with
the aim of curbing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs)

and its related technologies,

especially

nuclear weapons.

Malaysia calls upon States to establish necessary laws and measures to
curb proliferation activities.

6.

Malaysia also reiterates the call upon States to safeguard nuclear

material and all its relevant aspects including information. This, in our
view, would reaffirm the importance of preventing non-State actors from
obtaining information, technology or expertise required to possess or use
nuclear resources for malicious purposes or to disrupt information
systems at nuclear facilities, which may bring about severe ramifications.
Continuous national efforts, supplemented by international cooperation
mechanisms, is vital to ensure adequate and effective nuclear security is
put in place.

3

Mr. Chairman ,

7.

Malaysia

strongly

believes

that

nuclear-weapon-free

zones

(NWFZs) play a significant role in advancing global nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation objectives . NWFZs would encourage dialogue and
cooperation between States, which would, in turn, reduce the risk of
regional conflicts and provide security assurance to States w ithin the
region. As a State Party to the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free
Zone (SEANWFZ ) Treaty, Malaysia calls on the Nuclear Weapon States
to accede to the Treaty 's Protocol at the earliest possible opportunity to
ensure the Southeast Asia region remains free of nuclear weapons .

8.

Malaysia also welcomes all efforts in establishing nuclear-weapon-

free zones 1n other regions agreed between States in the region
concerned. In this regard , Malaysia calls upon States to conclude
agreements with a view of establishing new nuclear-weapon-free zones
in regions where they currently do not exist such as South Asia ,
Northeast Asia , Central Europe and the Middle East, as stipulated in the
1995 Resolution on the Middle East. The establishment of such nuclearweapon-free zones will ban the use, development and deployment of
nuclear weapons in these regions , thus paving the way towards general
and complete disarmament of WMDs.

4

9.

In conclusion, the responsibility of preventing the proliferation of

nuclear materials must be a collective effort between States and
supplemented by a strong domestic nuclear security culture. The
aspiration of a world free of nuclear weapons will only materialise
through concerted cooperation between States in ensuring that their
respective

regions

are

free

of these

weapons.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

5

categorically-unacceptable

