MALAYSIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

(Please check against delivery)
STATEMENT BY
MR. RAJA REZA RAJA ZAIB SHAH
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
PERMANENT MISSION OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
MAIN COMMITTEE 2
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
NEW YORK, 4 MAY 2015

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia congratulates you, on your appointment as Chairman of Main Committee 2 of the
2015 NPT Review Conference. My delegation assures you of our full support in presiding over
the important work of this Committee. Malaysia associates itself with the statement delivered by
Iran on behalf of the NAM States Parties to the NPT. In addition, my delegation wishes to
highlight the following points in our national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
As a State Party to the NPT and a Member State of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Malaysia is firmly committed to its obligations towards non-proliferation.
Malaysia joined other non-nuclear-weapon States Parties in undertaking to accept the nonproliferation provisions of the NPT, and we have continued to hold up our part of the bargain.
3.
This year’s Review Conference therefore again bears witness to a largely positive
assessment of the implementation on non-proliferation. Out of the 23 items in the 2010 NPT
Review Conference Action Plan related to nuclear non-proliferation, Malaysia is pleased to
observe more successes and tangible progress, compared to the items under the disarmament
pillar. As such, we find it inconsistent, to say the least, that Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States Parties
continue to be held against increasingly higher non-proliferation standards by the NuclearWeapon-States
Parties,
whether
in
the
Treaty
or
outside
this
process.
4.
Malaysia has lent its support to several non-proliferation initiatives which go beyond the
Treaty’s framework. We do so in the pursuit of our goal free of nuclear weapons, underscored
by our responsibility to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destructions, and in the spirit of
mutual cooperation between States to this end. But the imbalance between disarmament and
non-proliferation continues to remain a burning question which successive Review Conferences
have so far failed to address.
rd

313 East 43 Street
New York, NY 10017

Tel: (212) 986 6310
Fax: (212) 490 8576

Email: mwnewyorkun@kln.gov.my
Website: www.un.int/malaysia

Mr. Chairman,
5.
On our part, Malaysia’s implementation of the non-proliferation obligations is underlined
by our adherence to the nuclear safeguards and verifications regime. We reaffirm the centrality
of the IAEA in this regard, and recognize the Agency’s invaluable contribution in establishing and
promulgating effective safeguards and verification mechanisms for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
6.
Under the NPT Safeguards Agreement, Malaysia has welcomed regular IAEA safeguards
inspections at the country’s sole research reactor facility, the TRIGA MARK II PUSPATI. As a
further demonstration of transparency, besides continuing to provide access to the non-Material
Balance Areas (MBA) for safeguards inspections, Malaysia has also provided the Agency with
voluntary declarations of the type required under Article 2 of the IAEA Additional Protocol.
7.
However, Malaysia reiterates that the safeguards verification process should be done in a
professional, non-discriminatory and transparent manner. We believe that this process must be
conducted with full objectivity, and based solely on technical facts and credible information.
Malaysia also recognises the need for the IAEA to strengthen the rules and modalities on
preserving the confidentiality of safeguards related information, thus ensuring respect for the
sovereignty of State Parties. In this regard, we are of the view that the IAEA Secretariat should
be provided with the necessary resources and space, to discharge its mandated activities in an
effective and objective manner.
8.
Malaysia also engages in non-proliferation capacity building activities at the regional level.
We participate actively in various regional initiatives aimed at strengthening the non-proliferation
framework of understanding within the ASEAN and Asia-Pacific regions, as well as enhancing
national competence in safeguards and verification measures. As a regional National Security
Support Centre (NSSC), Malaysia is pleased to continue our cooperation with the Agency in
disseminating best practices and sharing of experiences within the region.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
Malaysia’s views on nuclear-weapons-free-zones and regional issues had been
highlighted during last week’s general debate. The establishment of a nuclear-weapons-freezone in the Middle East remains a high priority for my delegation, and we look forward to more
progress on this issue during the deliberations of the Subsidiary Body established under Main
Committee
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

2

