Mr. Chairman,
As I am taking the floor for the first time at this session, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of 2008 NPT Preparatory Committee. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to extend our best wishes for your success in this important endeavor and to reassure our full support.
The delegation of Mongolia associates itself to the statement, made by the esteemed representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States Parties, under this cluster.
Mongolia strongly believes that the NPT, as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime, must be implemented in its entirety. Nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing, and the NPT is crystal clear on that. The principle of non-selective, non-arbitrary implementation of international law applies fully to the international disarmament instruments, particularly the NPT and its three pillars - non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament, and the right to a peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The Preparatory Committee has in itself a vital role to play in consolidating the NPT Treaty, the non-proliferation regime and contribute to our common objective of achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world.
Mr. Chairman,
Today, I would like to draw the attention of Esteemed Delegates to the issue nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs) and Mongolia's initiative to institutionalize its nuclear-weapon-free status as a concrete contribution to the cause of strengthening the non-proliferation region in that part of the world. Mongolia has introduced a Working Paper on this issue to this PrepCom session.
The mere existence of NWFZs provides us with a hope and encouragement that a world free of nuclear weapons is indeed an attainable goal. We believe that in the context of the real need to consolidate further the global norms against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the establishment of both traditional and non-traditional NWFZs is highly instrumental for enhancing global and regional security.
The family of nuclear-weapon-free-zones has expanded significantly over the years and now encompasses more than 100 countries or the majority of world nations. Although each of these treaties has its own unique features, an ultimate objective of achieving a complete disarmament unites all of them.
As a strong advocate of nuclear-weapon-free zones, more than a decade ago, Mongolia opted irreversibly for an international nuclear-weapon-free status. At the United Nations General Assembly in 1992, the first President of Mongolia declared the territory of Mongolia as a nuclear-weapon-free.
Mongolia has continued vigorously to pursue international recognition and institutionalization of its nuclear-weapon-free status by working on establishing an international norm for such status. Mongolia's efforts to institutionalize its nuclear-weapon-free status at the international level enjoyed broad welcome and support from the international community.
The institutionalization of Mongolia's nuclear weapon-free status would mean a conclusion of an international treaty by Mongolia with its immediate neighbors, which would define clearly its nuclear-weapon-free status, commitments of its neighbors and other nuclear weapon states. The treaty is to contain basic undertakings similar to other international treaties that establish nuclear-weapon-free zones and at the same time reflect the unique position of Mongolia as a landlocked country that borders with two nuclear weapons States.
At the meeting held among the representatives of Mongolia, representatives of five nuclear weapon States and the United Nations in 2002, Mongolia presented the basic elements of the proposed trilateral treaty that would define Mongolia's status and possible commitments of the States parties. After receiving the overall positive responses and suggestions on the substance of the treaty from our neighbors, we have formulated a draft trilateral treaty and presented it to the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China in September 2007. Further consultations and negotiations on the draft treaty are expected to be held in the coming future.
Moreover, in the context its efforts for the institutionalization of its nuclear-weapon-free status, Mongolia has established formal working contacts with the treaty agencies of NWFZs to hold exchange of information and discussion on the issues of mutual interest.
Mongolia fully supports the concrete proposals for promoting closer cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zones, made by the Latin American and Caribbean Group at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee.
We believe that an updated comprehensive study on the NWFZs needs to be undertaken in order to highlight the experience of establishing NWFZs, strengths and weaknesses of the existing zones and their role in the achievement of the our goals towards non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Mongolia is ready to work on the above issues with other State Parties to the NPT and State parties to the NWFZs-treaties throughout the preparatory process as well as at the 2010 Review Conference.
Mongolia strongly believes that it would continue to enjoy the support and cooperation of the States Parties to the NPT, other states as well as the United Nations bodies in its effort for the institutionalization of its nuclear-weapon-free status at international level.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.