Mr. Chairman,
My delegation would like to speak on a cluster II issue regarding implementation of the provision of the NPT relating to nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs).
Mongolia supports NWFZs as an important part of a global non-proliferation regime and a disarmament measure. It warmly welcomes recent entry into force of the NWFZ treaty in Central Asia and is looking forward to the entry into force of the Pelindaba treaty in the near future. By contributing to implementation of the NPT, these zones practically promote a world free of nuclear weapons. Since the last NPT revision conference (revcon) in 2005, the above-mentioned and some other positive developments have been registered in this area despite the over-all weak progress in disarmament and non-proliferation. Bearing in mind the emerging encouraging signs and opportunities, Mongolia is looking forward to a productive outcome of the 2010 revcon that would further strengthen the existing and promote establishment of new NWFZs as well as to promoting the goals of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
As to Mongolia, as part of the emerging network of NWFZs, has since 2005 it has been pursuing institutionalization of its nuclear-weapon-free status. Thus in 2006 it has undertaken a review of implementation of its legislation defining the status at the national level and criminalizing acts that violate the status. This year it has started talks with its immediate neighbors on defining the status at the international level in the form of a trilateral (sub-regional) treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
As many of you may well remember, the 2005 Mexico Conference of States Parties to or Signatories of NWFZ treaties adopted the Tlatelolco declaration. Inter alia it has supported the establishment of focal points as a mechanism of better coordination
both within and among zones. These focal points have been established and have been promoting cooperation between zones. In April of this year the focal points of the Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bankgok and the Central Asian treaties as well as of Mongolia met in Ulaanbaatar for their first multilateral meeting.
In the general debate on 4 May my delegation briefly touched upon that meeting and its outcome. The participants of the meeting requested Mongolia, as organizer and Chair of the meeting, to inform this prepcom on its outcome (in order to save time a copy of the Chairman's statement is annexed to this statement).
Mr. Chairman,
The meeting provided an opportunity for its participants to exchange views on 3 clusters of issues: implementation of the 2005 Tlatelolco declaration, preparations for the second Conference NWFZs and preparations for the 2010 NPT revcon.
The participants of the meeting found establisliment of focal points very useful for better coordination, exchange of information and experience among NWFZs, for advancing, as needed, policies of common interest at various international fora, including at NPT revcons and their prepcoms, at the First Committee of United Nations General Assembly, etc.
Common themes of discussion at the Ulaanbaatar meeting were: the new encouraging signs and opportunities for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and how to make use of these opportunities; the significance of the entry into force of the Central Asia NWFZ treaty and forthcoming entry into force of the African treaty; the contribution that these zones can make to confidence-building, particularly in areas of tension such as the Middle East, etc.
Also the meeting discussed preparations for the second conference of NWFZs and Mongolia, which is being scheduled for 2010 just prior to the NPT revcon. Participants exchanged views the possible date, venue, format and outcome of the second conference. It was agreed that in order to better prepare for the conference, a working level meeting of focal points and interested parties needed to be held prior to the conference,
Mr. Chairman,
In 2010 NPT revcon can mark an important landmark in promoting the goals of achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world. Mongolia, together with other states of NWFZs is prepared to work actively with other States parties to the NPT at this preparatory stage as well as at the Conference itself to contribute to a breakthrough in the stalled nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation processes.
Thank you.
Chairman's statement at the conclusion of the Meeting of focal points of NWFZs and Mongolia
A meeting of focal points of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones of Latin America and the Caribbean (Tlatelolco Treaty), South Pacific (Rarotonga Treaty), Southeast Asia (Bangkok Treaty), Central Asia as well as Mongolia was held on 27-28 April 2009 in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. It discussed the issues of implementation of the Tlatelolco declaration of 2005 as well as preparations for the follow-up conference of the States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish NWFZs and Mongolia and for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. Following the consideration of these issues the Chairman is making the following statement:
1.	We reaffirm the validity of the Declaration of the first Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZs) adopted on 28 April 2005 in Mexico.
2.	We reaffirm that the existence of nuclear weapons and the possibility of their use constitute a threat to the entire humankind, and that their use would have catastrophic consequences for it. Hence nuclear disarmament, total prohibition and eventual elimination of nuclear weapons remain urgent tasks facing the humankind. We support the United Nations Secretary-General's five point proposal to revitalize the international disarmament agenda that includes a call for negotiations on effective measures leading to nuclear disarmament.
3.	We welcome the positive signs that are emerging to reduce further nuclear arsenals as well as the recent "surge" in various ideas and proposals to address the pending issues of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons as imperatives that humankind is facing today. These positive developments and trends taken together create a positive climate to pursue further the goals of a world free from nuclear weapons and of nuclear non-proliferation.
4.	We recognize the importance of multilateralism and in particular the notable roie played . by the United Nations in the area of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
and we reiterate our commitment to adopting measures to strengthen that role.
5.	We reaffirm that the NPT remains an essential instrument of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and reiterate the validity of the principles, obligations and rights contained therein, in particular in Articles III, IV, VI and VII.
6.	We are convinced that the establishment of internationally recognized NWFZs on the basis of agreements entered into freely among the States of the zone concerned promotes the goals of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Respect for such zones by Nuclear-Weapon and neighboring States constitute important nuclear disarmament commitments;
7.	We reiterate our concern that though almost a decade has passed since the 2000 NPT Review Conference, uneven progress has been marked in implementing the agreed nuclear disarmament measures. Therefore we urge all States to comply with the obligations set forth in Article VI of the NPT and elaborated further in the decisions of the Review Conference mentioned above;
8.	We urge Nuclear Weapon States to continue taking steps toward concluding an unconditional and legally-binding universal treaty on security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States and to honor their commitments regarding the security assurances until the treaty is concluded.
9.	We welcome the entry into force of the Central Asian NWFZ Treaty on 21 March 2009, first such a zone in the northern hemisphere and covering an area where nuclear weapons were previously based. With more rigorous safeguards provisions, it will make an effective contribution to strengthening regional and global peace and security.
10.	We are looking forward to the entry into force of the African NWFZ Treaty which would mark an important measure towards attaining the objective of global non-proliferation.
11.	We urge Nuclear Weapon States and any other States listed or mentioned in the relevant Protocols to the treaties establishing NWFZs that have not yet signed or ratified the Protocols to do so as soon as possible, and those that have made reservations or unilateral interpretations to modify or withdraw them,
12.	We express full support for Mongolia's policy of hist itut ion ali zing its nuciear-weapon-free status. We welcome the start of the talks by Mongolia with its two neighbours to conclude the required legal instrument and express the hope that it would soon result in the conclusion of ail international instrument institutionalizing the status.
13.	We reiterate our support for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East as well as Northeast Asia, South Asia and Central Europe;
14.	We reaffirm the importance of achieving the universality of the NPT and urge those States that are not parties thereto to accede to the Treaty without delay or conditions as non-nuclear-weapon States.
15.	We reaffirm the commitments reflected in the NWFZ treaties to further promote and strengthen these zones and to cooperate in promoting ratifications, where appropriate, by all States that belong to a NWFZ as a contribution to strengthening confidence, the NPT regime and achieving nuclear disarmament.
16.	We reiterate our demand for the total elimination of all nuclear testing and stress the importance of speedy entry into force of and achieving universal adherence to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty which would make a tangible practical contribution to the cause of nuclear disarmament. Pending its entry into force, a moratorium on nuclear-weapon-test-explosions or on any other nuclear explosions need to be maintained.
17.	We reaffirm the inalienable right of all States to develop the research, production and utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT. We further reaffirm that NWFZs do not prevent the use of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes.
18.	We recognize the fundamental role of the IAEA in the application and verification of compliance with the international safeguards regime provided for in the NPT and the
relevant NWFZ treaties, as well as its efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the international safeguards system.
19.	Bearing in mind that disarmament and non-proliferation education can contribute to promoting a world free of nuclear weapons threats, we encourage all States to promote programs instilling the values of peace and disarmament.
20.	We will continue preparations for the second conference of the States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish NWFZs and Mongolia to be held in advance of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. It was also understood that a parallel civil society forum would take place.