Statement by H.E. Ambassador Henk-Cor van der Kwast

Head of delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the 3th session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference

Cluster 2

Check against delivery

Statement by H.E. Ambassador Henk-Cor van der Kwast, Head of delegation of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to the 3th session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015
NPT Review Conference
Cluster 2

Mr. Chairman,
The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement by the EU and would in addition like to
make the following remarks.
Safeguards
Strengthening of the international safeguards system is a priority for the Netherlands. The
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, supplemented by an Additional Protocol should be the
universal standard for verification. We call upon all states that have not yet concluded an
Additional Protocol, to do so without delay.
In order to promote the universalization of the Additional Protocol, the Netherlands provides
financial assistance to the IAEA to organize seminars and workshops on this issue.
The Netherlands also stand ready to assist interested states bilaterally by sharing its knowledge,
experience and best practices on the development and implementation of an Additional Protocol,
both in a technical and legislative sense.
We strongly support the State Level Concept to strengthen the effectiveness en efficiency of the
IAEA verification program.
Another priority for the Netherlands is the entry into force of Amended Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We have supported the IAEA in its work for this
Convention and we call on all States that have not done so yet, to ratify it as soon as possible.
Export controls
The Netherlands is committed to uphold the highest standards of export controls and strives for
the transparency in this field. Good and effective export control mechanisms should be adhered
to by all countries involved in this trade, in order to maintain the appropriate, level of trustworthy
control of nuclear and related dual use goods and technologies.

Ten years after its unanimous adoption, UN Security Council Resolution 1540 remains of
undiminished significance for enforcing effective domestic non-proliferation controls. We look
forward to the special meeting that will be held on 7 May to commemorate its tenth anniversary.
Non Compliance
The Netherlands considers the proliferation of nuclear weapons as one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security and is gravely concerned by the major challenges in this field.
(DPRK)
The Netherlands strongly condemns all nuclear tests and the recent ballistic missile launches by
the DPRK. These acts are a blatant violation of its international obligations under relevant
Security Council Resolutions.
Although called upon by the international community to refrain from provocative actions that
threaten the international and regional security and stability, the DPRK continues with such
activities. We urge the DPRK to return to full compliance with the NPT and to comply with all
its international obligations, swiftly and unconditionally. We also urge the DPRK to refrain from
any further provocative actions.
(Iran)
The Netherlands supports the efforts of the E3+3 and Iran to reach a negotiated solution to
address the international community's concerns regarding the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme. While the welcome implementation of the Joint Plan of Action is a
first confidence-building step to address the most urgent concerns, efforts must now be aimed at
producing a comprehensive and final settlement. We also urge Iran to continue cooperating with
the IAEA regarding all outstanding issues, including those related to the possible military
dimension of the nuclear programme.
(Syria)
The Netherlands also calls on Syria to respond positively and without delay to the Agency's
request to resolve all outstanding questions, and to provide the IAEA the necessary cooperation
in that regard.

WMD Free zone in the Middle East
The Netherlands supports the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in
theMiddle East. We regret that the conference could not take place as foreseen, but we continue
to support the ongoing preparations and commend the tireless efforts of the Facilitator. We call
upon all States in the region to engage in a spirit of constructive cooperation that will lead to an
inclusive, substantive and goal-oriented conference.

