check against delivery

Non-Proliferation Treaty – Review Conference 2015

Statement by Ms. Marjolijn van Deelen
Deputy Head of Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands

Main Committee II

4 May 2015

At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of Main Committee II. We
assure you of our full support as you guide us in our work over the coming weeks.
The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement made by the EU and would in addition like to
make the following remarks.
[Non-compliance]
The Netherlands considers the proliferation of nuclear weapons one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security. The current proliferation challenges need to be dealt with in a
resolute way by the international community. We see both positive and negative developments.
[Iran]
On the positive side we welcome the recent framework agreement between the E3 + 3 and Iran. The
Netherlands fully supports the ongoing efforts by the E3+3 and Iran to seek a comprehensive, longterm settlement which would restore international confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme. We welcome recent progress and urge the parties to reach a full
agreement by 30 June. Verification of the implementation of the future agreement will be key in
restoring the international confidence needed. We call on Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to
address all outstanding issues, including those relating to a possible military dimension.
[DPRK]
Developments in DPRK are still a cause of deep concern to the Netherlands. The Netherlands strongly
condemns all nuclear tests and launches using ballistic missile technology by the DPRK. These acts are
a blatant violation of the DPRK’s international obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions.
We urge the DPRK to return to full compliance with the NPT and to comply with all its international
obligations swiftly and unconditionally. We also urge the DPRK to refrain from any further provocative
actions.
[Syria]
The Netherlands calls on Syria to fulfil its obligations in restoring non-compliance with its safeguards
agreement and to respond positively and without delay to the IAEA’s request to resolve all outstanding
questions and to provide the IAEA with the necessary cooperation.
[Safeguards]
Mr Chairman,
The IAEA’s system of safeguards is a fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. In order to obtain full confidence in
the peaceful nature of State nuclear programmes, all States parties must apply both a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement AND the Additional Protocol. We welcome progress on application of the
Additional Protocol since the 2010 Review Conference and we call for this verification standard to be
recognized in the outcomes of this conference.
At this point, I would also like to draw attention to the working paper of the NPDI on the application of
Safeguards in Nuclear Weapon States. Among many other recommendations, the paper proposes that
NWS, when identifying certain specified nuclear material as excess for military uses, make further
efforts to placing such excess under IAEA verification as soon as practicable in a manner to make it
irreversible.
[Export controls]
The Netherlands underlines the responsibility that all States parties have to ensure that their nuclearrelated exports do not directly or indirectly assist the development of nuclear weapons. Effective
export controls are central in enabling cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which
depends on a climate of confidence. This topic – as well as many others – is also elaborated in the
Working Paper of the Vienna Group of 10 which I recommend to you, Mr Chairman, and to all
delegations.

1

And last but not least,
[ME Zone]
The Netherlands continues to support the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East. We regret that the Conference could not take place as foreseen, but we continue to
support the ongoing efforts by the convenors, the Facilitator and States of the region. We are
impressed by the 300 plus meetings held as well as the 5 meetings in Glion. Here, we would like to
thank Ambassador Laajava for his tireless efforts. We call upon all States of the region to engage in a
spirit of constructive cooperation that will lead to an inclusive, substantive and goal-oriented
conference. In this regard we take note of the four working papers that have been submitted, which
we hope will contribute to a constructive discussion over the days and weeks to come.
Mr. Chairman,
In addition to my prepared statement, I would like to respond to questions raised about the nuclear
sharing arrangements of the Alliance that the Netherlands is a part of. I would like to reiterate that
this issue was addressed when the NPT was negotiated. At that time, basing arrangements existed
and were made clear to negotiating delegations and were made public. NATO’s basing arrangements
are fully compatible with the NPT obligations of NATO allies. Relevant NPT articles do not prohibit
nuclear basing or planning arrangements. These arrangements have been in place within NATO since
the NPT entered into force in 1970. Weapons assigned to NATO remain under national control of a
nuclear weapon state at all times and are never transferred.

2

