Non-Proliferation Treaty – Preparatory Committee 2017

Cluster II, 8 May 2017

Statement by Ambassador Marco Hennis
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
to the UN Organisations in Vienna

Mr. Chairman,
The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement made by the representative of the EU.
On a national basis, I would like to make the following additional remarks.
Safeguards
Making progress on nuclear disarmament and strengthening non-proliferation are priorities
for the Netherlands. We underscore that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes and that non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
technology are intrinsically linked. Therefore, the importance of a robust international nonproliferation regime can hardly be overstated and as this first PrepCom takes place in
Vienna, let me reconfirm that in line with Article III of the NPT the IAEA is the only
organization equipped with the necessary capabilities, experience and support to adequately
carry out the safeguards verification activities that are at the very heart of this regime.
The Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement, supplemented by an Additional Protocol (AP)
constitutes the current verification standard, which should be universally applied by all
States. We call upon all States, which have not yet concluded an AP, to do so without delay.
Furthermore, we stand ready to assist interested States bilaterally, or in any other
convenient format, by sharing our knowledge, experience and best practices on the
development and implementation of an Additional Protocol, both in a technical and
legislative sense.
The Netherlands fully supports the further development of safeguards in general, and of
state-level approaches by the IAEA in particular, to the implementation of safeguards. The
State-level Concept is an important development towards a more effective and efficient
safeguards systems that adheres fully to the principles of non-discriminatory, technical,
objectives-based safeguards implementation. We encourage the IAEA to enhance its
technical capabilities and keep abreast of scientific and technological innovations that hold
promising potential for safeguards purposes, and to continue building effective partnerships
with Member States in this regard.
Nuclear Verification
As a well-functioning international non-proliferation regime is of the utmost importance, we
strongly regret that some States are in non-compliance with their NPT safeguards
obligations.
DPRK
We strongly condemn the DPRK’s continuation of its illegal nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. These activities, which seriously challenge the Nuclear Non- Proliferation
Treaty as well as the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, are in clear violation and
flagrant disregard of its international obligations, as was expressed in numerous UN Security

Council Resolutions and IAEA General Conference resolutions. The DPRK must immediately
comply with its international obligations including the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement under the NPT, and must abandon without delay its nuclear capabilities, ballistic
missiles and weapons of mass destruction programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
Syria
As regards Syria we remain seriously concerned about the absence of cooperation and
progress in light of the finding by the IAEA Board of Governors in 2011 that Syria’s
undeclared construction of a nuclear reactor at Dair Alzour and failure to provide design
information for this facility constitutes non-compliance with obligations under Syria’s NPT
Safeguards Agreement. We urge the responsible Syrian authorities to remedy their noncompliance with their Safeguards Agreement, and for cooperating transparently with the
Agency to clarify matters with regard to Dair Alzour and the other relevant sites without
delay, and to conclude and bring into force an Additional Protocol as soon as possible.
Iran
We are pleased to note that in July 2015 the EU/E3+3 reached agreement with Iran on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The full implementation of the JCPOA, in which
Iran reaffirmed that it will under no circumstances ever seek, develop or acquire any nuclear
weapons, will contribute to building confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. While Iran’s provisional application of the Additional Protocol to its NPT
Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA is a welcome development, early ratification by Iran of
the Additional Protocol remains essential. The IAEA is responsible for monitoring and
verifying Iran’s implementation of its nuclear commitments under the JCPOA. The IAEA will
continue to need extra-budgetary funding over the lifetime of the JCPOA in order to fulfill
this role. We encourage all States that are in a position to do so, to make a contribution to
this end.
CTBT
The CTBT constitutes a core element of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation regime. The entry into force of the CTBT is of the utmost urgency as it will
provide the global community with a permanent, non-discriminatory, verifiable and legally
binding commitment to end any nuclear weapon test explosion or any other nuclear
explosion, as a means to constrain the development and qualitative improvement of nuclear
weapons. We therefor urge all States that have not yet done so to sign and/or ratify the
CTBT without delay, in particular those remaining eight Annex 2 States necessary for the
CTBT’s entry into force. We strongly support the strengthening of the CTBT’s verification
regime and call on all States signatories to support the work of the Provisional Technical
Secretariat to accelerate the completion of the International Monitoring System.

Export Controls
The Netherlands is strongly committed to uphold the highest standards of export controls
and strives for optimal transparency in this field. Good and effective export control
mechanisms should be adhered to by all countries involved in nuclear trade for peaceful
purposes, in order to maintain the appropriate level of trustworthy control of nuclear and
related dual use goods and technologies. We call on all States to ensure that their nuclear
related exports do not directly or indirectly assist the development of nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices and that such exports are in full conformity with the
objectives and purposes of the Treaty as stipulated in articles I, II and III of the Treaty.
WMD Free Zone in the Middle East
The Netherlands fully supports the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East as agreed in the resolution on the Middle East during the
1995 Review Conference and as reconfirmed in the 2010 NPT outcome document. We
continue to support the aim of convening a conference on the weapons of mass destruction
free zone in the Middle East freely arrived at between the States of the region. We therefore
call on all States in the region to engage in a spirit of constructive cooperation that will lead
to an inclusive, substantive and results-oriented conference.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, the Netherlands is highly attached to strengthening the international nonproliferation regime as this fundamentally contributes to international peace, stability and
security and to that effect we hope that discussions on non-proliferation here in Vienna this
week will have a positive impact. Last but not least, as a member of both the Vienna Group
of Ten and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative and being part of the European
Union, my delegation encourages you and other delegations to read the working papers on
behalf of the VG10, NPDI and the EU as they contain important notions and valuable
recommendations on Cluster II issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

