Statement of the Netherlands
delivered by
H.E. Robbert Gabriëlse, Permanent Representative to the
Conference on Disarmament
at

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty
on

Cluster II, Nuclear Non-Proliferation

Geneva, 27 April 2018

Thank you Mr Chair,
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement delivered by the EU and would like to make some
remarks in its national capacity.
Safeguards/ Nuclear Verification
The three pillars of the NPT are interlinked and mutually enabling. Guaranteeing adherence to nonproliferation obligations both enables the sharing of technologies for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and is complementary to nuclear disarmament efforts. Perhaps most importantly of all,
assuring non-proliferation is essential to reaching our ultimate goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons.
The safeguards system established under the responsibility of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) based on Article III NPT, is a fundamental component of the nuclear nonproliferation regime and plays an indispensable role in ensuring compliance with the NPT.
We would like to draw your attention to the NPDI working paper on the safeguards standard of
Article III. It emphasizes that the current standard of safeguards is the Comprehensive Safeguard
Agreement supplemented by an Additional Protocol. We stand ready to assist other Member States
and the IAEA with the practical development of safeguards. Therefore, among other things, the
Netherlands has been funding the IAEA Member State Support Programme for nuclear verification
with EUR 100.000,- per year.
The Netherlands fully supports the further development of safeguards methodology in general and
in that regard of the state level approach in particular.
We encourage the IAEA to keep modernising its way of working with regard to safeguards
implementation, be it through technical and scientific modernisation or by improving efficiency and
effectiveness through better analysis.
Mr. Chair,
We have all witnessed the value of a robust nuclear verification regime on several accounts.
Iran
A clear example of the importance of strong nuclear verification is the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. With the JCPOA Iran is – in the words of the IAEA – subject to the world’s most robust
verification regime. In its ten reports since Implementation Day, the IAEA has confirmed that it
has been able to verify Iran’s nuclear-related obligations under the JCPOA.
The Netherlands firmly believes the JCPOA represents a significant gain for nuclear verification in
Iran and urges all parties to continue to fully implement the JCPOA’s provisions.
DPRK
On the other hand we remain extremely concerned by the DPRK’s development of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery and we strongly condemn the DPRK’s nuclear and ballistic
missile tests, which represent a clear threat to the region, as well as to international peace and
stability. The latest statement of the DPRK to suspend nuclear testing is encouraging. We call on
the DPRK to refrain from further missile and nuclear testing in order to allow the diplomatic
consultations to bear fruit, and to return to the NPT and IAEA safeguards regime. The goal of these
efforts can only be complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
Syria
In 2011 the IAEA Board of Governors concluded that Syria’s undeclared construction of a nuclear
reactor at Dair Alzour and failure to provide design information for this facility constituted noncompliance with Syria’s obligations under its NPT Safeguards Agreement. Syria still has to provide
this information. We call on Syria to cooperate with the IAEA, clarify matters with regard to Dair
Alzour and the other relevant sites without delay and to sign and ratify an Additional Protocol as
soon as possible.
CTBT
The CTBT constitutes a core element of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, in addition to its
contribution to nuclear disarmament. A legally binding and verifiable end to nuclear weapons
testing will form a giant hurdle for the development of nuclear weapons.

We continue to support strongly the development of the CTBT’s world-class verification system. It
has demonstrated its value by immediately and accurately detecting the nuclear tests conducted
by the DPRK, proving its unique ability to provide independent and reliable data, something that
no single country alone could do. We call on all States signatories to support the completion of the
International Monitoring System.
In light of the CTBT’s importance for –inter alia- nuclear non-proliferation It is therefore of the
utmost importance that the CTBT enter into force as soon as possible. We urge all States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT without delay, in particular the eight Annex 2 States,
whose ratification is necessary for the CTBT’s entry into force.
I would also like to refer to the recommendations contained in the Vienna Group of Ten Working
Paper.
Export Controls
The Netherlands is strongly committed to upholding the highest standards of export controls and
strives for optimal transparency in this field. Export controls are a fundamental part of the
implementation of Articles I and II, as they help ensure that nuclear trade for peaceful purposes is
not directly or indirectly used for the development of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. We call on all States to adhere to and effectively apply export control mechanisms, in full
conformity with the object and purposes of Articles I, II and III of the NPT.
Security Council resolution 1540 makes an important contribution in this regard, as it requires all
UN member states to establish and maintain appropriate effective export controls.
WMD Free zone – Middle East
Finally, Mr Chair, the Netherlands would like to express its unequivocal support for the
establishment of a weapons of mass destruction free zone in the Middle East; we call on all States
in the region to engage in a spirit of cooperation that will allow the organisation of a conference on
this issue. We suggest that the relevant paragraphs in the 2017 PrepCom summary form a starting
point for this discussion.
Thank you Mr Chair.

