New Zealand believes that creating a world safe from nuclear weapons must remain one of the international community's most pressing priorities, and an effective and credible non-proliferation regime is essential for achieving a world free of nuclear weapons.
The NPT Treaty confers a set of interrelated and mutually-reinforcing obligations and rights on States Parties. Accountability is a key element of this regime, and this is reinforced by the Treaty's safeguards system. This provides assurances of compliance and creates the stable international environment necessary to allow for the full realisation of the Treaty's goals. In the international arena we face a number of complex verification challenges which could damage the international non-proliferation agenda.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (the IAEA) has a key role to play in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons by providing robust verification and assurances that nuclear activities undertaken by States are purely for peaceful purposes and that nuclear material is not being diverted. The IAEA has traditionally done this through its compliance and verification activities and through the implementation of the national Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements.
Mr Chairman
It is important to ensure that the IAEA has the tools necessary to carry out its verification mandate, and the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement alone is no longer adequate in giving the Agency the necessary authority to do this. The Additional Protocol is the key tool in this regard and forms the contemporary verification standard, and should always feature as a condition in any new supply arrangements. New Zealand strongly urges all States Party which have not yet done so - particularly those with significant nuclear activities - to conclude and to bring into force an Additional Protocol without delay.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand notes the important role of export controls in preventing the possible misuse of nuclear-related exports for developing nuclear weapons or explosive devices. Effective export controls form an integral part of the non-proliferation regime. It is up to all states to ensure that these export control regimes continue to work effectively, and that they continue to support the wider international non proliferation framework.
Similarly, New Zealand notes the important role that mechanisms and partnerships such as the G8 Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction can play in ongoing support of the
international non-proliferation effort. New Zealand continues to be a contributor to the G8 Global Partnership and is currently working with donors to assist with projects established under the G8 Global Partnership. We would encourage other states parties to consider making contributions to such regional or international activities.
Thank you Mr Chairman