

Mr. Chairman, 
First allow me to congratulate you on assuming the Chair of Main Committee II. Sir, you can count on the full co-operation of the New Zealand delegation. 
In this statement we will focus on non-proliferation and safeguards, export controls and nuclear weapon-free zones. 
Mr. Chairman, comprehensive and internationally accepted safeguards buttress international security Credible and effective safeguards are fundamental to nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. They are, importantly, a vital underpinning of international co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities. It is therefore of concern that there are still more than fifty States Parties to our Treaty which have not yet brought into force the safeguards agreements required of them. We urge them to delay no longer in taking this urgent and fundamental step towards meeting their Treaty obligations. 
Paragraph 11 of the 1995 'Principles and Objectives' supported strengthening the effectiveness of the safeguards system. The product of lengthy and difficult negotiation, a Model Protocol additional to existing safeguards agreements was adopted by the IAEA Board of Governors in 15 May 1997 to do precisely that. The measures in the Model Additional Protocol are designed to provide the IAEA with as comprehensive a picture as is practicable about a State's nuclear material and activities, and additional physical access to locations where nuclear material is, or could be, present. 
New Zealand was one of the earliest States to sign and bring into force an Additional Protocol. It is a matter of regret to US that so few others have joined us so far in implementing Additional Protocols. Our objective was universal subscription to the Additional Protocol by the year 2000 That goal has sadly been missed. 
New Zealand firmly believes that sooner rather than later States Parties should aim towards establishing a comprehensive safeguards agreement coupled with an Additional Protocol as constituting the IAEA full-scope safeguards referred to hi paragraph 12 of the 'Principles and Objectives'. In New Zealand's view, consideration should be given to the acceptance of the Additional Protocol as a condition of supply as soon as there is wider adherence to the Protocol. 
Mr. Chairman, paragraph 13 of the Principles and Objectives calls for fissile material transferred from military use to peaceful nuclear activities to be placed under IAEA safeguards. New Zealand very much welcomes decisions taken in this regard to ensure the safe and effective management of nuclear material designated as no longer required for defence purposes. We are especially supportive in this connection of the Trilateral initiative of the United States, the Russian Federation and the IAEA and would hope to see all five nuclear weapon states included in similar arrangements. 
Also to be welcomed, Mr. Chairman, is the agreement that was reached in 1997 on a set of Guidelines for the Management of Plutonium. We are of the view that comparable guidelines for the management of highly enriched uranium are called for. 
On a less positive note, Mr Chairman, we have again to refer to the situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea where the IAEA Director General remains unable to verify the correctness and completeness of that country's initial declaration of nuclear material. We urge the DPRK to fulfill its stated intention to come into full compliance with its APT safeguards agreement wiry the IAEA without delay. That agreement remains binding and in force, and must be implemented fully. 
We must also note with concern that, as the Director General of the IAEA reported to us, since December 1998 the Agency has not been in a position to implement its mandate with respect to Iraq under the relevant UN Security Council resolutions. 
Mr. Chairman, nuclear export controls are complementary to safeguards. They too are instruments of non-proliferation. Moreover, they are intended to provide an environment of confidence for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Properly structured and applied, they foster and facilitate trade in nuclear material and equipment for peaceful purposes. 
Transparency in nuclear-related exports controls is, of course, of the essence. Paragraph 17 of the Principles and Objectives is clear on this point New Zealand was pleased to have been associated with the two international Seminars on the Role of Export Controls in Nuclear Non-Proliferation held in 1997 and 1999 and will continue to support all efforts to respond to the call made in 1995 for the promotion of transparency in nuclear-export controls. 
Turning to nuclear weapon-free zones, we would use this opportunity to express, in the strongest terms, New Zealand's support for nuclear weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the region concerned. They are part of the architecture that can usefully encourage and support a nuclear weapon free world. The more nuclear weapon-free zones we can create, the less space there will be for nuclear weapons. 
The importance of nuclear weapon-free zones is stressed in the Principles and Objectives. Paragraph 7 relates to the role of the nuclear weapon States in respecting and supporting the relevant protocols. In this connection New Zealand is pleased that since 1995 the United Kingdom and France have ratified the protocols to the Treaty of Rarotonga. We hope that the United States will be in a position to do likewise as soon as possible. 
We also would take this opportunity to applaud the very solid progress with the nuclear free zones for South-east Asia and Africa, and the work underway in Central Asia. We would note however that there has been a regrettable lack of progress in developing nuclear weapon-free zones in regions of tension, such as in the Middle East or South Asia, to which priority is assigned in the Principles and Objectives. 
Mr. Chairman, each of the existing zones is the product of specific circumstances in the regime concerned. New Zealand sees the further expansion of these zones as a dynamic process. 
We strongly support and co-sponsor the Brazilian-led initiative in the UNGA for a zone covering the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas. New Zealand is keen to see this concept taken forward, with the countries of the zones concerned, in a process of consolidation consistent with international legal obligations. Enhanced political cooperation between countries in the zone is a first step that New Zealand will want to explore with other co-sponsors. 
Nuclear weapon-free zones are very much part of today's security architecture. The extension of zones and the creation of new zones, with specific mechanisms to meet the security concerns of regions, can progressively codify the transition to a nuclear weapon-free world. 
Mr. Chairman, I thank you. 
  

