
Creating a world safe from nuclear weapons must remain one of the international community's most pressing priorities. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are key elements of New Zealand's foreign policy. New Zealand is committed to achieving progress on both of these fronts.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has a key role to play in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. New Zealand attaches great importance to ensuring that the IAEA has all of the tools necessary to undertake this essential work. In this regard, New Zealand recognises the vital role of the Additional Protocol, which together with a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement forms the contemporary verification standard.
New Zealand believes that an Additional Protocol should always feature as a condition in new supply arrangements developed with non-nuclear-weapon States. New Zealand urges all States Party that have not yet done so -particularly those with significant nuclear activities - to conclude and bring into force an Additional Protocol without delay.
It is of deep concern to New Zealand that thirty States have yet to fulfil their respective safeguards obligations under the NPT. We urge those states remaining outside the safeguards system to remedy this situation as a matter of priority.
Mr Chairman
Iran's non-compliance with UN Security Council and IAEA resolutions is of concern to New Zealand. We urge Iran to implement all necessary measures called for by the UN Security Council and IAEA to build confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
We appreciate the IAEA's ongoing efforts to clarify all outstanding issues about Iran's nuclear activities, and welcome the progress made thus far. We urge Iran to engage constructively with the IAEA to address the Agency's remaining questions.
New Zealand strongly supports a diplomatic solution to Iran's nuclear programme based on Iran's compliance with IAEA and UNSC requirements. Iran must play its part to realise this outcome.
Mr Chairman
We are pleased to see that the relationship between the IAEA and the DPRK continues to be constructive. We note, however, that the positive progress with the second phase of the Six Party process, which began with the disablement of the three nuclear facilities at Yongbyon, has not proceeded as quickly as we would have hoped.
It is New Zealand's hope that progress towards implementing the Six Party Agreements will soon be fully back on track, and that these will be the first steps in the DPRK returning to full compliance with its international obligations. We look forward to the DPRK fulfilling their commitments, which would contribute to the verifiable denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula.
Mr Chairman
Export controls have an important role in preventing the possible misuse of nuclear-related exports for developing nuclear weapons or explosive devices as recognised in UN Security Council resolution 1540 It is up to all states to ensure that these export control regimes work effectively, and that they continue to support the wider international non-proliferation framework.
UNSCR 1540 also underlines the paramount importance of States establishing effective physical protection measures over nuclear material and nuclear facilities. New Zealand calls on those states that have yet to do so to make a political commitment to the IAEA's Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, and Guidance on the Import and Export of Radioactive Sources. The IAEA has encouraged States to harmonise their practices in line with the Guidelines, and we would encourage all States parties to act accordingly. Such action would bolster existing non-proliferation efforts.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand notes the important role that the G8 Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction plays in enhancing the physical protection of nuclear facilities and material in the former Soviet Union. New Zealand continues to be a contributor to the G8 Global Partnership and is currently working with donors to assist with projects established under the G8 Global Partnership. We would encourage other States parties to also consider making contributions to the G8 Global Partnership.
New Zealand is a strong and active supporter of the Proliferation Security Initiative, consistent with our longstanding commitment to preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems and related material. Likewise, New Zealand was pleased to join the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in November last year. Our decision to join the Initiative demonstrates our strong commitment to prevent nuclear materials and technologies falling into the hands of non-State actors.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand recognises that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are inextricably linked. New Zealand believes that action on both fronts is essential for the realisation of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Thank you Mr Chairman
