FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
STATEMENT BY
AMBASSADOR AUDU KADIRI,
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF NIGERIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
IN GENEVA
ON CLUSTER II ISSUES:
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS, SAFEGUARDS AND NUCLEAR
WEAPONS-FREE ZONES
AT THE
SECOND PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
MEETING (PREPCOM) OF THE 2020 REVIEW
CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA, APRIL 2018.

Thank you Chairperson,
We align ourselves with the Statements delivered on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the NonProliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), respectively,
on this agenda item. However, allow me to make some
remarks in national capacity.
2.

Nigeria

considers

Non-Proliferation,

Safeguards

and

Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones to be important elements of this
treaty. In this regard, we have continued to observe our
obligations on Non-Proliferation fully. Not only have we signed
and

are

implementing

the

Comprehensive

Safeguards

Agreement and Additional Protocols with the IAEA, we have
also worked with other states to bring into force the Africa
Nuclear Weapons-Free Zone (Pelindaba Treaty). Thus ensuring
our region remains free of these dangerous and inhumane
weapons.
3.

Banishing nuclear weapons from the arsenals of States,

preventing their proliferation and ensuring access to the
application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and human
progress, through cooperation, and in line with Articles IV is a
goal to which my delegation calls upon all countries to
1

rededicate themselves anew. Consequently, while underscoring
the important role of the IAEA with respect to verification and
Safeguards, we reiterate the objective of universalizing the
NPT. We call on all States in a position to do so, to persuade
those states still out of the NPT framework to promptly accede
to

the

treaty

and

place

their

nuclear

facilities

under

comprehensive IAEA Safeguards.
Mr. Chairman,
4.

The current global climate of what appears to be early

signs of a renewed arms race typified by stockpiling and
modernization of arsenals, as well as deepening tensions
involving nuclear weapon states, is an added reason for the
global community to pursue disarmament in a more forthright
manner, and non-proliferation in a holistic manner.
5.

In this regard, we are gravely concerned over the on-

going vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons through the
continued nuclear arms race by NWS, via the expansion of their
stockpiles of nuclear weapons, and the improvement and
development of new types of nuclear weapons. These troubling
actions are in clear violation of the legal obligations under the
Treaty, and must therefore cease.
6.

We also call on all Nuclear Weapon States parties to

consider putting to an end, nuclear weapon-sharing with other
2

States under any circumstances and any kind of arrangements.
In a similar fashion, we reiterate the need for all Parties to the
Treaty to cease nuclear cooperation with non-states parties.
Mr. Chairman,
7.

Nigeria

emphasizes

that

the

most

comprehensive

safeguard against the use of nuclear weapons is their total
elimination. In this regard, we welcome the historical adoption
of the land mark Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
(TPNW), on 7 July 2017. We stress that the Treaty will
complement and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, including towards fulfilling the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations of the NPT.
8.

We therefore urge all states to support the TPNW by

signing and ratifying the Treaty at an early date. It is in view of
this that we welcome the award of the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize
to the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons
(ICAN) for its contribution towards the conclusion of the TPNW
and the elimination of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
9.

We unequivocally support the call for the establishment of

a nuclear weapon-free-zone in the Middle East and continue to
3

express deep dissatisfaction at the failure to implement, as
agreed, commitments and obligations of the 1995 resolution on
the Middle East and the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference, regarding the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East.
10. In the context of Nuclear Non-Proliferation, we stress the
importance of the norm against nuclear weapon testing. We
recognise in this regard, the important work of the CTBT and
regret that the treaty on this important building block is yet to
enter into force. Accordingly, we call on the concerned states
to quickly ratify this important treaty.
I thank you.

4

