Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster II Issues: Non-Proliferation, Safeguards and
Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zones
Statement by Nigeria
Geneva, 29 April 2013
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 Review Conference reaffirmed that the full and effective
implementation of the NPT and the regime of non-proliferation had a vital
role in promoting peace and security. The conference also reaffirmed that
every effort should be made to implement the NPT in all its aspects and to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
This reaffirmation remains relevant and it is for this reason that we
call on all States parties to abide by their commitments under the NPT,
which for more than four decades has been the key multilateral instrument
in the fight against nuclear non-proliferation. Since ratifying the NPT on 27
September 1968, Nigeria has maintained that non-proliferation must be
pursued in all its aspects. We demonstrated our unwavering commitment
to the non-proliferation regime by signing the CTBT in 2000 and ratifying it
the following year. We believe that a categorical statement on global
intention to address proliferation in all regions of the world begins with a
moratorium on nuclear testing and adherence to the letter and spirit of the
CTBT. This is why we would like to see an early entry into force of the
CTBT.
Mr Chairman,
It would be significant to recall that the 2010 Review Conference also
recognized the need for the right of States parties to peaceful use of
nuclear energy not to be constrained as we seek to implement the NPT.
The statement made by the IAEA at the beginning of this PrepCom
contains a number of projections on the rising demand for nuclear energy
by States Parties, including my country Nigeria. Nuclear energy can
contribute to development and energy security. However, even as the right

to the peaceful use of nuclear technology is upheld by the third pillar of the
NPT, safeguard measures that fall under the purview of the IAEA remain
fundamental in ensuring that these rights are not used in a manner that
could undermine non-proliferation. We are pleased to state that Nigeria’s
quest for nuclear energy for peaceful purposes has been pursued with the
full cooperation and assistance of the IAEA.
Mr Chairman,
IAEA’s verification of reports submitted by States and its capacity to ensure
safety for all is an appropriate and time-honoured confidence-building
measure. Nigeria welcomes the Agency’s comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and its Additional Protocols. We need to enhance the
verification system for the non-proliferation regime and encourage a robust
cooperation between States and the Agency in furtherance of this goal.
This of course should be in line with adequate export control mechanism
that addresses all security concerns through its universal application.
Mr Chairman,
Nigeria views the establishment of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones as an
important step towards the total elimination of these weapons and as a
means of pursuing the denuclearization of all regions. The treaties of
Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, Pelindaba and Semipalatinsk are significant
towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. They are crucial components of our
meeting and we should continue to work toward their consolidation, while
encouraging other regions to become NWF Zones. In this regard, we join
the call for the establishment of a Middle East NWFZ in line with the
outcome of the 2010 Review Conference. We note, with satisfaction, the
announcement that the US Government has taken steps towards ratifying
the relevant protocols of the Treaty of Pelindaba. We urge States that are
yet to sign or ratify the Treaty, including its protocols, to do so without
delay.
I thank you.

*****

