2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee 2
4 May 2015
Statement by Norway

Mr. Chairman,
First, let me congratulate you on your election to lead this important Committee. I can assure
you of my delegation’s full support.

Mr. Chairman,
Proliferation goes to the very heart of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The risk of
nuclear proliferation remains a challenge and a threat to international security.

The Nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) in 2013
is a clear violation of its international obligations. Concerns also remain with the Iranian and
Syrian nuclear programs.

However, the progress that has been made in the political dialogue on the Iranian nuclear
program is encouraging. Norway welcomed on 2nd April the political agreement between
P5+1, the UK, France, Germany, the US, Russia and China, and Iran. We fully support the

(Check against delivery)

parties’ continued efforts to reach a comprehensive and verifiable agreement by 30 June, to
ensure that Iran’s nuclear programme is only used for peaceful purposes.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) will continue the important task of
verifying Iran’s compliance with its obligations under these international agreements.
Norway supports the crucial work of the IAEA, and has so far provided over NOK 12 million
to this verification work.

Norway also supports the Framework for Cooperation between the IAEA and Iran, which in
particular addresses concerns about the possible military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear
programme.

The crucial role of the IAEA in securing non-proliferation is clear, and we must further
strengthen the Agency. We should reach a common understanding of the fact that the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols protect our collective
security and facilitate peaceful uses. Regarding the Agency’s Safe Guards Regime, we
welcome progress made on the state-level concept, especially the improvements in
effectiveness and efficiency, particularly considering the expected growth in nuclear energy.

Mr. Chairman,
Next year will mark the 20th anniversary of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT), and there is a need for real progress towards entry into force of the treaty. We
underline the importance for all countries to sign and ratify the treaty, and the Annex 2
countries have a special responsibility assuring the entry into force.

(Check against delivery)

While we wait for these ratifications, it is important to complete the International Monitoring
System, and make sure that CTBTO has the necessary funding to develop and maintain the
system. We also emphasise the importance of capacity building related to the technical work
of the CTBT, and Norway has been a committed contributor to these efforts.

Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear security is important to facilitate further progress in Peaceful Uses. Furthermore, it
is crucial for international efforts on non-proliferation. The Nuclear Security Summits have
contributed substantially to nuclear security and to keeping fissile material beyond the reach
of terrorists. We also welcome the IAEA Ministerial on Nuclear Security and would like to
see a role for the IAEA in international cooperation on securing all fissile material.

We must intensify efforts to sustain existing regional Nuclear Weapons Free Zones, and to
create new ones. The establishment of a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in Central Asia is a
welcome step forward. We need to move forward towards a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.

Finally, Mr. Chairman,
I would like highlight that Norway is a member of the Vienna Group of 10, which has
submitted a working paper containing valuable and practical guidance on non-proliferation
and peaceful uses.

Thank you for your attention.

(Check against delivery)

