Innlegg – PrepCom I - Cluster II
Mr. Chair,
A watertight non-proliferation regime is essential in achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear weapons. A credible and robust non-proliferation regime enables all State parties
to the NPT to fully exploit the potential of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technologies.
Norway has aligned itself with the Working paper submitted by the Vienna Group of Ten. My
delegation would like to highlight the following observations:
We have to resolve current outstanding proliferation concerns. The most serious is obviously
caused by the DPRK. Norway firmly condemns the nuclear tests carried out by the DPRK,
and we are alarmed by the nuclear rhetoric of that country. We urge the government in
Pyongyang to show much needed restraint and contribute constructively to a de-nuclearized
Korean peninsula. We all want to see this crisis resolved politically. Norway has joined the
statement on North-Korea´s nuclear challenge to the NPT and encourages other states to do
the same.
The nuclear agreement with Iran – the JCPOA - demonstrates that diplomacy works when
there is a political will. It is now essential to sustain this political will in ensuring the full implementation of the Agreement. All States Parties should contribute to this end. Norway has
done so and intends to continue doing it.
The JCPOA may also be seen as a building block towards the goal of a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. We regret that it was not possible to convene a conference as called for by the 2010 resolution. We must re-double or efforts on the basis of NPT
article VII and the UN guidelines. In this vein, it is essential to resolve other compliance matters such as the one represented by the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Chair,
While addressing outstanding proliferation concerns, we must further refine the nonproliferation regime to close any potential proliferation loopholes. We have achieved much,
but more remains to be done. It is vital that all States parties cooperate fully with the IAEA in
implementing their safeguards obligations. The Agency must make full use of all the tools at
its disposal to draw conclusions and resolve safeguards issues. The IAEA comprehensive
safeguards agreements and the additional protocol constitute the verification standard. This
combination is the only way to provide the assurances of non-diversions from declared activities and of the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities. Norway urges all States
to bring into force the additional protocol.
Effective export controls strengthen the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and are central to enable peaceful use of nuclear energy and other nuclear applications.
Adequate national domestic laws and regulations are essential, and we strongly encourage
adherence to export control guidelines of the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers
Group.
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty is an essential non-proliferation tool, both horizontal and vertical. We urge all Annex 2 countries to ratify the CTBT. An early commencement and conclusion of negotiations on a non-discriminatory and effectively verifiable Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) would also serve our non-proliferation agenda. Another im-

portant non-proliferation measure is the establishment and consolidation of nuclear-weaponsfree zones as well as other weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of arrangements freely
arrived at among States of the region concerned.
Mr. Chair,
Nuclear security has in previous years been characterized as a fourth pillar of the NPT. We do
not engage in that type of discussions. What matters is that all States maintains the highest
standards of nuclear security. The Nuclear Security Summits have in this respect been extremely important. A key deliverable from Norway in the process is the pledge to minimize
and eventually phase out the use of highly enriched uranium in the civilian sector. We have to
secure all sensitive material.
Norway calls for full universalization of instruments such as the 2005 Amendment to the
Conventions on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism as well as relevant guidelines and other politically binding instruments.
Norway supports and takes part in a number of initiatives to sustain the non-proliferation
norm. We attach great importance to UN Security Council resolution 1540. At the same time,
Norway underlines the key role of the IAEA to promote nuclear security, and not least in carrying out vital mandate on safeguards. We must ensure that the Agency is fully equipped with
the necessary political and financial support.
Thank you.

