NEW ZEALAND
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF
THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS

CLUSTER TWO DEBATE

STATEMENT BY H.E. PHILIP GRIFFITHS
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN VIENNA

7 MAY 2012

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr Chairman
An effective international non-proliferation regime is a prerequisite for a world free of
nuclear weapons. Critical to such a regime are transparency and accountability which
are underpinned by the NPT's safeguards system. This system provides assurances of
compliance and creates the stable international environment necessary to allow for the
full realisation of the Treaty's goals.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has a key role to play by providing
robust verification and assurances that nuclear activities undertaken by states are solely
for peaceful purposes. For New Zealand, like other countries, the integrity of IAEA
verification practice is fundamental to the assurances we seek through the international
nuclear non-proliferation framework.
New Zealand believes that an Additional Protocol should always feature as a condition
of new supply arrangements for nuclear and associated material. New Zealand
encourages all countries that have not yet done so - particularly those with significant
nuclear activities - to conclude and bring into force an Additional Protocol with the IAEA
without delay. We urge those states remaining outside the NPT safeguards system to
remedy this situation as a matter of priority.
New Zealand also emphasises the important role that effective export controls play in
supporting the wider international non-proliferation framework.
Mr Chairman
We face a number of complex compliance challenges which threaten to undermine the
effectiveness of the international non-proliferation regime.
Iran's continued noncompliance with UN Security Council and IAEA resolutions remains of deep concern.
Along with many other countries, New Zealand has consistently urged Iran to engage in
confidence-building activities, including transparency measures and ratification of the
Additional Protocol. Those calls have not yet been heeded. Late last year the IAEA
reported extensive information regarding possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear
programme. Earlier this year the IAEA indicated that Iran had significantly expanded its
enrichment activities and fuel fabrication and conversion.
We urge Iran to implement all elements of the relevant resolutions of the UN Security
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors. To do so would help to build confidence in
the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. Iran needs to constructively address
the IAEA's remaining questions and the deficit of international confidence in its nuclear
intentions.
In this light, New Zealand welcomes the announcement of resumed talks between Iran
and the IAEA and further diplomatic dialogue with the EU3 + 3 on the nuclear issue.
We encourage Iran to continue down this path of constructive engagement. We call

again on Iran to respond substantively to the concerns of the international community
and the IAEA.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand was deeply disappointed by the recent attempted launch by the DPRK of
a satellite using ballistic missile technology. Such needless provocations must cease.
We urge the new DPRK leadership to return to a path of dialogue and peace, including
by keeping to the commitments it made in February, among them agreement to the
return of IAEA inspectors.
We note Syria's lack of meaningful cooperation with the IAEA, despite repeated
opportunities to engage. New Zealand looks to Syria to sign, bring into force and
implement in full the Additional Protocol so that the IAEA can provide the necessary
assurances regarding Syria's nuclear activities. Syria needs to take these actions
without delay to assure the international community that its nuclear programme exists
solely for peaceful purposes.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand is a strong advocate of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones and the role they
play in promoting and safeguarding regional and international peace and stability,
supporting global disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, and reinforcing the NPT
itself. Today, 60% of the world's states are covered by nuclear-weapon-free zones,
including all states of the Southern Hemisphere. This is a singular achievement, and a
powerful demonstration of the collective will that can exist at a regional level to rid the
world of nuclear weapons. We look forward to increasing cooperation among existing
zones and to the creation of further zones.
In this connection, New Zealand would like to note our strong support for the initiative to
establish a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction. We thank the Finnish government and Under-Secretary Jaako Laajava for
the significant efforts undertaken so far to convene the Conference in 2012. We hope
the participants at this year's conference can start to lay the groundwork for a robust
agreement that includes all states of the region, and that lives up to the expectations of

1995.
New Zealand strongly believes that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
inextricably linked. Action on both fronts is essential for the realisation of a world free of
nuclear weapons.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

