PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER TWO DEBATE
H.E. Deborah Geels
Permanent Representative, Vienna
1 May 2014
As delivered
Mr Chairman
An effective international non-proliferation regime is a prerequisite for a world free of nuclear
weapons. Critical to such a regime are transparency and accountability which are underpinned by
the NPT's safeguards system. This system provides assurances of compliance and creates the stable
international environment necessary to allow for the full realisation of the Treaty's goals.
The   integrity   of   the   International   Atomic   Energy   Agency’s   (IAEA)   verification   activities   is  
fundamental to the assurances New Zealand seeks that nuclear activities undertaken by states are
solely for peaceful purposes.
New Zealand believes that an Additional Protocol should always feature as a condition of new supply
arrangements for nuclear and associated material. New Zealand encourages all countries that have
not yet done so – particularly those with significant nuclear activities – to conclude and bring into
force an Additional Protocol with the IAEA without delay.
We  welcome  the  IAEA  Secretariat’s  recent  paper  on  the  State-Level  Concept  as  part  of  the  Agency’s  
efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of safeguards implementation so that it can
address new challenges with the finite resources available.
With no nuclear weapons, no nuclear energy generation, no nuclear reactors and no production of
uranium or other relevant material, New Zealand conducts only very minor activities subject to
safeguards.   New   Zealand’s   comprehensive   safeguards   agreement   with the IAEA came into force in
1972, and our Additional Protocol in 1998. We continue to look for opportunities to strengthen the
application of safeguards in New Zealand. We were pleased to sign up to the modified Small
Quantities Protocol earlier this year and have recently joined the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network to
further facilitate the sharing of best practice in the region.
New Zealand also emphasises the important role that effective export controls play in the wider
international non-proliferation framework and the assurances that support it. New Zealand applies
export controls to materials and dual-use goods which can be used in a nuclear weapons programme
and co-ordinates and strengthens these measures with other members of the Nuclear Suppliers
Group. Consistent  with  New  Zealand’s  commitment  to  strengthening  global  non-proliferation efforts
in November 2013 New Zealand joined the Zangger Committee.

1

Mr Chairman
We reaffirm that all States Parties have a duty not only to live up to their own safeguards obligations
but to address compliance issues wherever they arise. The international non-proliferation regime
continues to face a number of compliance challenges.
The   concerns   that   New   Zealand   shares   with   the   international   community   regarding   Iran’s nuclear
programme are long-standing and complex. We recognise that a final resolution of these concerns
will be as difficult as it is necessary. New Zealand has welcomed recent progress in international
efforts to resolve outstanding safeguards concerns in Iran and was pleased to make a financial
contribution to the Agency for the implementation of the Joint Plan of Action agreed between Iran
and the E3+3.
We call on Iran to continue its recent cooperation with the IAEA and to faithfully implement the
measures in the IAEA Framework for Cooperation and the Joint Plan of Action. Doing so will enable
the Agency to take another step toward addressing all outstanding issues and providing credible
assurances that all nuclear material in Iran is in peaceful activities.
Mr Chairman,
North Korea continues to seriously undermine the international non-proliferation regime to which
New Zealand is strongly committed. New Zealand is disappointed that there is no evidence of any
positive  change  in  North  Korea’s  defiance of the international community and multilateral institutions
with respect to its nuclear programme. We share the concerns of the international community about
the   DPRK’s   continuing   operations   at   Yongbyon, repeated missile launches and breach of both
Security Council and IAEA Board resolutions. New Zealand calls on North Korea to abandon its
nuclear and missile programmes, and instead to focus its energy and attention on improving the
lives of its people and engaging constructively with the international community.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand is a strong advocate of nuclear-weapon-free zones and the role they play in promoting
and safeguarding regional and international peace and stability, supporting global disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts, and reinforcing the NPT itself.
That  60%  of  the  world’s  states  are  covered  by  nuclear-weapon-free zones, including all states of the
Southern Hemisphere, is a singular achievement. It is a powerful demonstration of the collective will
that can exist at a regional level to rid the world of nuclear weapons. We look forward to increasing
cooperation among existing zones and to the creation of further zones.
In this connection, as a firm advocate of nuclear-weapon-free zones, we welcomed the reaffirmation
at the 2010 NPT Review Conference of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East and the agreement to
convene a Conference in 2012 on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
It remains the case that by convening a Conference participants can start to lay the groundwork for
a robust agreement that includes all states of the region, and that lives up to the expectations of
1995.
New Zealand would like to note our strong support for the initiative to convene the Conference and
for the significant efforts undertaken so far by the Finnish government and Under-Secretary
Laajava.

2

We regret that the Conference has not yet taken place, and we continue to call on the convenors,
the facilitator and the States of the region to work constructively and diligently so that we might live
up the expectations of 1995.
Mr Chairman
We recognise the fundamental role of the NPT in global nuclear non-proliferation efforts and are
pleased to play a part in supporting its achievement of our shared objectives in nuclear safety,
security, safeguards and peaceful uses.
Thank you.

3

