PHILIPPINES
Statement

CLUSTER 2 ISSUES
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

07 May 2012, Vienna

Mr. Chairman,

The Philippines associates itself with the statement delivered by the
Ambassador of Indonesia on behalf of the NAM states parties to the NPT, and
the relevant working papers submitted by the NAM States parties to the NPT.

The Philippines advocates that the three pillars of the NPT-nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
-must be promoted in a mutually reinforcing manner.

Having expressed our

position on the issue of nuclear disarmament and the 1995 resolution on the
Middle East in our statement during the general debate, we wish to make our
views known on the issues under this cluster.

Strengthening Safeguards and the IAEA

The Philippines is mindful that, two years after the consensual adoption of
the Final Document in the 2010 Review Conference, 14 States parties to the
Treaty have yet to bring into force comprehensive safeguards agreements
despite the urgent call under Action 25.

We believe that a comprehensive

safeguards agreement coupled with an Additional Protocol comprise the

verification standard that can provide assurance that an NPT State party is living
up to its obligations under the Treaty.

While recognizing that the Additional

Protocol is not a legal obligation under the NPT, it is a crucial legal tool for the
IAEA to enhance its verification capabilities and to realize a strengthened
safeguards system. We note that to date, 138 States have concluded Additional
Protocols, and such Protocols are in force for 115 States. We urge all States
parties that have not yet done so to conclude and to bring into force Additional
Protocols and to implement them provisionally pending their entry into force.

We underscore that the IAEA is the sole competent authority with the
mandate for verifying and assuring compliance by NPT States parties with their
safeguards obligations. As called for under Action 33, States parties must ensure
that the IAEA continues to have all political, technical and financial support to
enable it to effectively carry out its responsibility to apply safeguards. Member
States of the IAEA in a position to do so should also consider making additional
contributions for the completion of the Nuclear Material Laboratory that will
significantly enhance the Agency's capabilities in the independent analysis

of

nuclear material samples.
At the same time, in order to maintain the credibility of the IAEA, the IAEA
Secretariat should strengthen its efforts to strictly apply its information security
policies and regulations and to uphold the principle of confidentiality particularly
in the handling of sensitive safeguards information.

In working towards the goal of strengthening safeguards and achieving
universality of the Treaty, States parties to the Treaty should refrain from the
transfer of nuclear technology and materials to States that remain outside of the
NPT, unless they are placed under comprehensive safeguards agreements.
Otherwise, this lends into question the credibility of nuclear export control
regimes that advocate stringent compliance with their safeguards and security
obligations among NPT States parties while at the same time extending similar

trade opportunities with those outside the ambit of the Treaty without the
requirement of any significant non-proliferation or disarmament commitments.

In the same vein, States parties in full compliance with their safeguards
obligations should be able to fully participate in the transfer of nuclear equipment,
material and technology and international cooperation thereon, and any undue
restriction and limitation inconsistent with the Treaty should be eliminated.

Nuclear Weapons Free Zones

The Philippines believes that the establishment of nuclear weapons free
zones is a major contribution to non-proliferation efforts, and we encourage
dialogue and appropriate interaction among representatives of nuclear weapons
free zones in order to share experiences and best practices that would help
contribute to attaining these goals.

We welcome the conclusion of negotiations in 2011 between the States
Parties to the Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ) and the
Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) to enable the NWS to accede to the SEANWFZ
Protocol. The NWS and States Parties of SEANWFZ agreed to take the
necessary steps to enable the NWS to sign the Protocol and its entry into force at
the earliest opportunity.

Regional and Other Issues

On regional issues, the Philippines believes that the early establishment of
a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East as called for in the Final
Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference would significantly contribute to
regional peace and security. We join other delegations in calling upon Israel to
accede to the NPT.

Also in the context of the Middle East, the Philippines looks forward to the
resolution of all outstanding issues relating to Iran's nuclear program, which can
only be achieved through diplomacy and dialogue. We call on Iran and the E3
plus 3 to sustain the process of dialogue and diplomacy in order to arrive at a
comprehensive solution that will eventually establish before the international
community the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear program.

The

resolution of the Iran nuclear issue is critical to the realization of a nuclear
weapon free zone in the Middle East.
On the DPRK, the Philippines deplores the launch by the DPRK of a long
range rocket in defiance of UN Security Council resolutions 1695 (2006), 1718
(2006) and 1874 (2009), notwithstanding its failure. We also express our serious
concern over recent reported activities on the ground pointing to the possibility of
a third nuclear test launch.

The Philippines strongly urges the DPRK to desist

from acts of provocation and to end its use or testing of ballistic missile
technology. The DPRK should abide by the relevant UN Security Council
Resolutions and abandon all existing weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.

We regret that as a result of DPRK's action, the outcome of bilateral talks
last March between the DPRK and the United States--which showed some
promise in moving forward on the DPRK nuclear issue-has not been
implemented. The Philippines reiterates its readiness to work with international
partners in the effort to ensure peace and stability in the Korean Peninsula.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, the Philippines joins the call of other delegations for
the accession to the NPT of India and Pakistan, which would contribute to
confidence building and minimize security tensions in South Asia.

Thank you, Mister Chairman.

