Please Che

J

jk Agam&t
~ GW Vj/$
ioJ
£@,;J

PHILIPPINES
DRAFT PHILIPPINE STATEMENT

2nd Preparatory Committee Meeting to the 2020 Review Conference on the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapo_ns
Assembly Hall, Palais des Nations, Geneva
Cluster 2: Non-Proliferation

Mr. Chair

Overview

1. The Philippines reaffirms its commitment to the prevailing non-proliferation
architecture, and believes that the level of discourse should be elevated
from platitudes to concrete measures. Despite the difficulty of weaving
together discordant national interests and adopting common positions, the
States Parties to the NPT should safeguard the gains of previous NPT
endeavors, build upon them, and work for the success of the present
Review Cycle.

2. While the Philippines sees the importance of making parallel efforts in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation, we would like to point out that our ultimate
goal is nuclear disarmament to realize a world free of nuclear weapons.
With that understanding, we wish to highlight the following elements to
further bolster the existing non-proliferation regime and work for its full and
effective implementation.

MISSI<;)N OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERN/\ TIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEVA
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland eTel: (+41) (0) 22 716 1930 eE-mail: mission@gencvapm.ph

t,
\

Please Check Against Delivery

Recommendations

3. The Philippines sees merit in discussing feasible short-term outcomes to
incrementally strengthen the Review Conference. We wish to propose that
the NPT States Parties consider practical measures to implement previous
Review Conference outcomes, specifically the 64-point action plan of 2010
and the 13 Practical steps of 2000. The following are the key measures.

4. On safeguards, the Philippines regards the combination of a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement (CSA) coupled with an Additional Protocol (AP) as
the gold standard in promoting non-proliferation efforts. My delegation
therefore calls on NPT States Parties that have not yet done so to take on
board the CSA plus the AP so as to build confidence and ensure the
peaceful nature of their nuclear programs.

5. On preventing the acquisition of nuclear weapons and delivery systems, the
Philippines has taken action in line with international commitments on nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Philippine Congress
passed the Strategic Trade Management Act (STMA) to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by closely managing the trade
in strategic goods. This law adheres to UNSC Resolution 1540 on Weapons
of Mass Destruction.

6. On the protection of nuclear material, the Philippines is working towards the
ratification of the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material. The Philippines commends delegations that
have ratified this amendment, which led to its entry into force in 2016.

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEVA
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel: ( +41) (0) 22 716 1930 • E-mail: mission @gcncvapm.ph

Please Check Against Delivery

7. The Philippines reiterates its call for the negotiation of a legally binding
instrument banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear
weap ons and other nuclear explosive devices . We welcome the participation
of all relevant parties in this process.

8. On the Korean Peninsula, the Philippines welcomes the recent positive
developments and the willingness of the concerned States to engage in
constructive dialogue . We call on delegations to support all diplomatic
initiatives to resume dialogue on the denuclear ization of the Korean
Peninsula.

9 . We also affirm the importance of regional nuclear-weapon-free zones to the
exist ing global non-proliferation regime and continue to support the ongoing
efforts toward the establishment of such zones, especially in the Middle
East. The Philippines associates itself with the NAM's Working Paper on the
Middle East.
10.

The Philippines also assoc iates itself with the Working Papers of

Japan oh the DPRK and of the Netherlands on nuclear safeguards
standards , both under the Non-Proliferat ion and Disarmame nt Initiative
(NPDI) .

Mr. Chair,

Conclusion

11.

1 would

like to conclude by stressing the need for greater coherence

and cooperat ion between States on intelligence sharing, capacity-building
and assistance . Furthermore, the industries, academia and civil society have

MISSfON OF TH E REPUBUC OF TH E PI-IILIPPlNES TO THE UNITE D NA TIONS
AND OTHE R INTERNATION AL ORGANlZ ATfON S [N GENEVA
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel : (+41) (0) 22 7 16 1930 • E-mail: mission@genevapm.ph

Please Check Against Delivery

an important contribution to make to realizing an effective non- proliferation
regime.

12.

Forty-eight years since the NPT entered into force, the world still sits

under the shadow of devastation and despair that nuclear weapons may
cause humanity. The Philippines appeals to all States Parties to work
together and amicably discuss divergences that may undermine the review
process. We must muster the resolve to work on immediately implementable
actions and initiatives to buttress the non-proliferation architecture, and
more importantly nuclear disarmament.

13.

Thank you Mr. Chair.

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHTUPPfNES TO THE UNTTEDNATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS fN GENEY A
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel: (+41) (0) 22716 I 930 .E-mail: mission@genevapm.ph

