Philippine Intervention
Cluster 2 Issues (General)
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Philippines associates itself with the statement
delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the NAM.
The Philippines recognizes the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and reaff~rmsthe importance of strengthening the Agency's nuclear
verification capabilities and establishing confidence in the peaceful nature of
nuclear activities.
The conclusion of a Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and Additonal Protocol and providing the Agency with tools and
resources to effectively implement a credible verification system will go a long
way to reducing the risk of nuclear proliferation, thereby contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
A few years after the consensual adoption of the Final Document of the 2010
NPT Review Conference, 13 States >Parties have yet to bring into force
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements despite the urgent call under Action
25. A Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, coupled with an Additional
Protocol, comprise the verification standard that can provide assurance that
an NPT State party is living up to its obligations under the Treaty.
The Philippines recognizes that the Additional Protocol is not a legal
obligation under the NPT, but it is a crucial tool for the IAEA to enhance its
verification capabilities so that the international community can be guaranteed
of the peaceful nature of any country's nuclear program. To date, 139 States
have concluded Aditional Protocols and are in force for 119 States. We urge
all States that have not done so to conclude and to bring into force Additional
Protocols and to implement them provisionally pending entry into force.
The IAEA is the sole competent authority with the mandate of verifying and
assuring compliance by NPT States parties with their safeguards obligations.
As called for under Action 33, States parties must ensure that the IAEA
continues to have all political, technical, and financial support to enable it to
effectively carry out its responsibility to apply safeguards.
In the same vein, in order to maintain the credibility of the IAEA, the Agency's
secretariat should strengthen its efforts to strictly apply its information security
policies and regulations to uphold the principle of confidentiality in the
handling of sensitive safeguards information.
In our desire to contribute to the non-proliferation effort, the Philippines is very
much interested in joining the Global Partnership Against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction and is undergoing a review of
the obligations for membership. Once the internal procedures have been
completed, the Philippines will formally notify the current chair of the Global.
Partnership of its intention to join. The Philippines is an active participant in
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, the Proliferation Security
Initiat~ve,and the Nuclear Security Summit.

The Philippines recognizes the importance of preventing the spread of illicit
nuclear materials through strategic trade controls, hence we are in the
process of finalizing the "Strategic Trade Management Act," which will be
submitted to our Congress this year.
In relation to strategic trade controls, the Philippines hopes that there will be
enhanced cooperation in the Asia Pacific region on the implementation of UN
Security Council Resolution 1540.
Thank you.

