Statement of
of the Republic of Poland
Cluster JI- Nuclear Non-Proliferation

Mr. Chairman,

Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union within the framework of Cluster II.

I would like also to draw attention to the working documents issued by the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative that are relevant to the subject of
nuclear non-proliferation, especially presented this year Working Paper no 29
entitled

''Nuclear

safeguards standards under the Treaty on the Non-

Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
At the same time, allow me to add couple of remarks in my national capacity.

Mr. Chairman,

The world continues to face major proliferation challenges that represent one
of the gravest threats to international peace and security. Although the darkest
scenarios from the past, envisaging that more than 25 countries will be in
possession of nuclear weapons has not materialized, the present danger of
nuclear proliferation did not evaporated at all. The possible proliferation of
nuclear technologies and capabilities, to state and non-state actors, and its
consequences, still are to be seriously concern about, and need our sustained
attention and engagement.

The most prominent example is the DPRK. Despite encouraging diplomatic
prospects in recent days, North Korea's efforts to enhance its nuclear and
ballistic capabilities remain the main point of concern for the global nonproliferation regime. The development of DPRK's illegal nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes challenge the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as well as
the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. They are in clear violation and
flagrant disregard of its international obligations, as expressed in numerous UN
Security Council Resolutions. The DPRK must comply with its international
obligations and abandon without delay its nuclear capabilities, ballistic missiles
and weapons of mass destruction programmes in complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
In this respect the DPRK'sdeclaration on halting nuclear and intercontinental
missile tests must be followed through. We hope that the Inter Korean Summit
decisions will be implemented contributing to reaching an agreement on
denuclearisation of the DPRKand deescalating tensions in the region.

The situation in the Middle East, with prolonged stalemate regarding the
process of creation of the Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone, is also of
our concern. Poland remains com·mitted to establishment of a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East. We
regret that it was not possible to convene the conference as foreseen by the
outcome

document

from

the 2010 NPT Review Conference. The only

sustainable way forward to agree on the arrangements for a meaningful
conference is through

dialogue and confidence building among all the

stakeholders.

Mr. Chairman,

2

The full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)by
all parties is necessary as a contribution to regional peace and security. In our
view the JCPOA remains the best available mechanism to assure international
community the civilian nature of the Iran's nuclear program. In this regard we
welcome the IAEA efforts to strictly monitor and verify Iran's commitments.

On a broader scale Poland believes in strong verification regimes that can build
trust, increase confidence and transparency. In this regard the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in securing non-proliferation obligations
under art. Ill of the NPT is crucial for the credibility of the Treaty. The IAEA
safeguards help to create environment conducive to safe and predictable
nuclear cooperation.

The Comprehensive

Safeguard Agreements

(CSA)

together with the Additional Protocol are essential instruments for establishing
a solid verification standards. We call on all States, who have not done so, to
conclude, sign and ratify the Additional Protocol without delay.

Mr. Chairman,

For many years Poland has been actively involved in combating proliferation
risks. Our Chairmanship in the NPT and efforts to make it effective and credible
is yet another testimony of our ongoing commitments. Moreover by assuming
the Chairmanship of the Hague Code of Conduct against proliferation of the
ballistic missiles (HCoC) for the period of 2017-2018 we clearly demonstrated
not only our serious engagement in this regard, but also that mutually linked
proliferation of nuclear technologies and ballistic missile did not escape from
our security radar.

3

Poland is

strongly committed to uphold the highest standards of export

controls and strives for optimal transparency in this field. Suitable

and

effective export controls mechanism should be adhered to by all countries
involved in nuclear trade for peaceful purposes, in order to maintain the
appropriate level of trustworthy control of nuclear and dual use goods and
technologies. We encourage all countries to adhere to the export control
guidelines of the Zangger Committee and Nuclear Supplier's Group (NSG}.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland is highly attached to strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime as this fundamentally contributes to
international peace, stability and security.

Mr. Chairman,
Thank you for your attention.

4

