Statement by Romania
at the 2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster II
(Viena, 2 - 12 May 2017)

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates,
Romania fully aligns itself with the statement of the European Union, and welcomes this
opportunity to reaffirm, in national capacity, its commitment to promoting nuclear
nonproliferation.
Let me stress from the beginning my country's belief that a strong nonproliferation regime
contributes fundamentally to international peace and security.

The IAEA's system of

safeguards is a fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and all
cases of noncompliance must be addressed in a resolute way in order to maintain the
credibility and effectiveness of the NPT regime.
The nuclear and ballistic military programs of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(DPRK) are blatant violations of the relevant UN SC Resolutions, being one of the current
major threats to international peace and security. We condemn these actions in the strongest
possible terms. We urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to comply fully,
unconditionally and immediately with all its international obligations. The destabilizing
actions of the DPRK confirm the urgent need t() further strengthen the NPT and for the
CTBT to enter into force as soon as possible.
Regarding the Zone Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East, senous
security and political challenges remains but progress still could be achieved. Direct dialogue
and arrangements freely arrived at by all the countries in the region are the only credible way
1

to move forward with this project, the states in the regions having the ownership for this
process.
We welcome the progress made in the implementation of the JCPOA provisions, and, in its
support, Romania made a voluntary financial contribution to the Agency's extra-budgetary
fund for the IAEA's verification activities in Iran. The JCPOA is an important
non-proliferation instrument and a successful, multilateral endeavor, of which all provisions
must be fully implemented.
Mr. Chairman,

The threat of nuclear terrorism is one of the significant challenges to international peace
and security. This is due to issues that are of great concern to us all, such as the global
expansion of terrorism through the emergence of ISIS, and the unsettled regional
conflicts which ultimately foster challenges such as illicit trafficking, including of
radioactive or nuclear material. Hence, our strong belief that in the field of nuclear security
there is no room for complacency.
eyber-attacks are yet another threat to all of us here today. In a society that relies heavily
on information technology, it is inevitable that our nuclear security depends on the
measures that we are able to take in order to ensure solid information systems.
Against this backdrop of ever-increasing security threats at global, regional and national
level, the challenges posed by nuclear terrorism are demanding more and more concerted
actions at all levels.
The IAEA has the central role in coordinating the global efforts and strengthening the
international nuclear security architecture. The entry into force of the Amendment to the
Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (aCPPNM) on 8 May 2016 is an
essential step in strengthening nuclear security.
GICNT
We therefore acknowledge the need for consolidating regional cooperation in the field of

2

nuclear security, including through developing joint activities and training, as well as
information exchanges and an increased focus on cooperation on border security and
detection.
To this end, Romania fully supports international efforts aimed at preventing nuclear
terrorism, and welcomes the role played by the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear

Terrorism (GICNT) in this respect. In accordance with our efforts to promote nuclear
security at national, regional and international level, Romania, in cooperation with GICNT
and INTERPOL, organized the regional Exercise OLYMPUS, on 19-21 October 2016, in
Bucharest. The scope was to discuss challenges during a nuclear security incident, and to
i"dentify strategies and best practices for overcoming these challenges.
As follow-up to Exercise Olympus, Romania is planning to organize a practical exercise

focused exclusively on nuclear forensics. The event will be organized in close
collaboration with the GICNT, and will be dedicated to nuclear forensics experts from the
reglOn.

Furthermore, on 16-18 November 2016, Romania hosted a Proliferation Security

Initiative (PSI) regional workshop, which sought to increase participating States'
understanding of regional proliferation trends, and increase regional understanding of, and
commitment to, upholding the PSI Statement of Interdiction Principles.

The substantial results of the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit brought us decisively closer
to our common goal of securing nuclear material and thus preventing nuclear terrorism. Its
Final Communique and the five Plans of Action serve as guidelines for taking forward the
nuclear security agenda while the Nuclear Security Contact Group (NSCG) will maintain
the nuclear security issue high on the international agenda.
As part of its contribution to the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit, Romania pledged a series
of new unilateral commitments towards consolidating nuclear security, all of which are in
3

process of being implemented:
,/ Romania contributed with voluntary financial contribution to the IAEA Nuclear
Security Fund;
,/ The Romanian Authority for the Control of Nuclear Activities (CNCAN) has
successfully improved the security for the transport of nuclear and radioactive
material by implementing a pilot system for tracking the movement of radioactive
sources including their transport;
,/ In 2017, Romania will develop and implement a national nuclear security
culture-training course, suitable for the personnel of all organizations with
responsibilities for nuclear security.

Nuclear forensics
Another NSS commitment refers to strengthening the national capabilities for nuclear
forensics investigations.
As such, national scientists from "Horia Hulubei" National Institute for R&D in

Physics and Nuclear Engineering (IFIN-HH) successfully developed nuclear forensics
by adapting/repurposing the existing national capabilities to support nuclear forensics
analyses.

Our nuclear forensics experts are actively involved in the activities of the Nuclear
Forensics International Technical Working Group (ITWG), such as the ITWG annual
meeting, the Galaxy Serpent 2 Exercise, and the Collaborative Materials Exercise
(CMX-5). Additionally, the Data Review Meeting of CMX-5 was held in April 2017 in
Bucharest.
As outcome of the rapid development of its nuclear forensics capabilities, Romania stands
ready to share its experience and expertise with other states in the region. As a result, two

Memoranda of Understanding were signed with the neighboring countries of the
4

Republic of Moldova and Hungary.

Furthermore, IFIN-HH has been invited to collaborate with international organizations,
and thus two more agreements - a Practical Agreement with IAEA, and an Amendment to
the existing Collaboration Agreement with JRC dedicated to strengthening scientific
collaboration between JRC Karlsruhe and IFIN-HH - will be signed in the near future.
Mr. Chairman,

Romania would like to assure you and the international community of its full support and
cooperation in our common efforts to promote nuclear nonproliferation.
Thank you.

5

