(Check against delivery)

Statement by H.E. Adrian Vierita, Permanent Representative of Romania
at the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Second Session , Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018
Cluster II (Non-proliferation)

Mr. Chairman,

Romania aligns itself with the EU statement. In addition, allow me to highlight a
few remarks in national capacity .
The NPT, as the cornerstone of the global nuclear governance, has proved its value
as an indispensable framework of global disarmament and non-proliferation ,
covering nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. Romania remains fully committed in promoting its universalization
and strengthening its implementation, as a crucial instrument for ensuring
international peace, security and stability.
The current security environment is challenged by major proliferation threats that
need to be addressed in a resolute manner, in order to ensure the credibility and
effectiveness of the NPT regime. We strongly believe that non-prolife ration is much
more than an end in itself, but also a prerequisite to achieve nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,

Since our previous Preparatory Committee, much has changed in terms of
proliferation threats. While we welcome the ongoing diplomatic process to achieve
a peaceful solution on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, we underline the
crucial importance for the DPRK to demonstrate genuine political will and to
undertake concrete steps for a complete, verifiable and irreversible denucleari zation.

Verification is key in building and maintaining trust in the nonproliferation field. In
light of this, Romania welcomes the work of the IAEA in monitoring the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The
continuation of the full and rigorous implementation of the Plan of Action , based on
the letter and spirit of the UN Security Council Resolution 2231 will foster the
regional and international security and will build trust among parties. We encourage
Iran for an early ratification of the Additional Protocol, considering its potential of
building confidence and ensure sustainability.
On the establishment of a Middle East Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) Free
Zone, we consider the 1995 Resolution valid until its goals and objectives are
achieved, in line with the 2010 Action Plan. A meaningful conference to achieve this
aim, requires dialogue and building confidence among the stakeholders in the region
on the basis of arrangements freely agreed upon by them.
Mr. Chairman,

Another measure that would significantly strengthen the non-proliferation regime is
achieving the universal implementation of the IAEA's Additional Protocol (AP), the
de facto standard for verifying the NPT safeguards obligations. Romania reaffirms
its full support for the IAEA and its work to monitor compliance with nuclear
safeguards around the world and the need to ensure that it has both the resources and
authority to fulfill its job. The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement together with
the Additional Protocol represent the international verification standard. Romania
steps up its efforts to promote adherence to the Additional Protocol and its
universality.
Mr. Chairman,

Nuclear terrorism is among the main challenges to international peace and security,
one that calls for our collective efforts and concerted actions at all levels to prevent
the risk of nuclear material falling out of regulatory control.
In this sense, a full implementation of the obligations underscored by the landmark
agreement, the UN Security Council 1540 Resolution, by all states is essential. We
encourage all states that have not yet done so to accede to the International
Convention on the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, to ratify the
amendment to the Convention of Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM)
and participate in the global nuclear security regime.

As we have already stated in the general debate, we share the view that regional and
international cooperation is vital to ensure nuclear security and prevent cross-border
terrorist activities. Therefore, Romania welcomes the unique value of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) within the global nuclear security
architecture, in supporting partners building national capabilities to combat
terrorism.
In line with our commitments to promote nuclear security at national, regional and
international level, Romania conducted, in 2017, in close collaboration with the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), a regional and practical
exercise, Olympus Reloaded, focused on nuclear forensics, as a follow-up to
Exercise Olympus in 2016. We strongly believe that such events offer the necessary
tools to face the threat of nuclear terrorism as they underscore the essential role of
preparedness.
Mr. Chairman,

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Romania's readiness to work closely with all
States Parties to NPT to achieve progress in strengthening the non-proliferation
system and to ensure the global peace and security.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

