
The IAEA safeguards system established pursuant to the NPT plays a m«\s; important role in ensuring the viability of the non-proliferation regime. The 1A1IA safeguards supported by technological measures are not only a control mechanism <>i non-proliferation which assures that all States Parties comply with the NPT but ais«< a considerable confidence-building measure.
With a view to efficient implementation of the provisions of Article 111 of the NPT, Russia consistently upholds the IAEA safeguards and stands for universalizing
the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.
However, it is important to make sure this system does not remain static. Ail states should look for ways of ensuring that the safeguards system stacks up to new challenges posed to nuclear non-proliferation. First efforts to improve the safcgunids system were made by way of establishing such mechanism as the Additional Protocol according to which the states granted the IAEA broader rights to access mid ear facilities and information. Nowadays it helps ensure non-diversion of nuclear materials for military purposes as well as absence of any undeclared nuclear materials and activities.
We advocate universalization of the Additional Protocol as an instrument thai enhances the efficiency of the IAEA safeguards system. It is essential to put forth active efforts towards making the Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA and if-Additional Protocol a universally recognized verification standard m the field oi nuclear non-proliferation. The Russian Federation has offered and will continue u offer assistance to strengthen the IAEA safeguards system through financing thi national programme of scientific and technical support for these safeguards.
In this context we would like to draw attention to holdback m the work of the Advisory Committee on Safeguards and Verification established in June 2005 as it could not come up with recommendations to the Board of Governors. The issue oi extending the Safeguards Committee's mandate will be
cons] ilci ed in June this \ear
In the present situation, it would be wise for the Committee to focus on providing technical recommendations. At the same time, we call upon all States not to regard work carried out by the Committee as an attempt to impose additional financial or legal obligations on them or to infringe upon their rights. The matter in question is elaboration of a plan of action aimed at enhancing the efficient-} and effectiveness o! the safeguards system. It is our common task.
Mr. Chairman,
Implementation of the IAEA safeguards under the Article III of the Treaty is a prerequisite for cooperation in the field of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Today there is a real danger that under the pretext ol' de\ eloping nucVa: > one might create capabilities that, if necessary, may be eas-ah used lor ra : purposes. At the present stage Russia is willing lo consider the Additional Pro?- \ ■ a condition for transfer of sensitive nuclear technologies arid equipment make every effort to make the Additional Protocol a smr.i sa.ni new siatuhao field of nuclear supplies arrangements.
We share the opinion of the IAEA General Director Dr < IBaradei batata nowadays there is no reason to construct new enrichment lacs lines since the has enough operational capacities to provide fuel for all existing nuclear power p\ and research reactors as it is. We believe that today it is important to eta-working towards establishing a system of guaranteed nuclear fuel supplies elaborate long-term options of handling nuclear technology, parti cularh at regional centers on the basis of a multilateral approach.
Such an approach has a significant non-proliferation dimension: sensitive nuclear fuel cycle operations in international c eivcrs placed under aika supervision allows for a more effective control over the har.dhng of nuclear aaac while precluding its possible use for undeclared purposes. Mas option does not ,a the prospects of applying nuclear technologies for peaceful use. We regard Russian initiative on establishing international centers uffei nig nuclear ft:el «. services as a possible way of addressing this problem. Our delegation will dwe! this issue in more detail in its statement on Article IV of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Export control was designed to be one of the most important instrument combat illicit trafficking in nuclear material. Enhancing its efficiency, strengths relevant regimes, increasing their transparency, as well as involving countries possess relevant technology in the export control regimes range among measures would prevent unauthorized transfers of controlled items and technology.
Russia is constantly improving its national legislation on export control, country supports, and participates in, the activities of the Nuclear Suppliers G: and the Zangger Committee. We believe that they have managed to prove it po^ to establish a concerted procedure for the transfer of controlled products wn infringing upon the legitimate rights to carry out international cooperation in peaceful use of nuclear energy. We consider it necessary to further strengthen i mechanisms.
In this context we would like to underscore the significance of Article 11 1.; 2 of the NPT. It could only be implemented subject to efficient accounting control of nuclear material at the national level as well as to export co? procedures.
Therefore, it is highly important for all countries to impk-.-cn! the pre- isr-n.-of the UNSCR 1540 adopted upon the initiative of Russia and aimed at pre* ennng WMD, related materials, technologies and means of delivery Aom falling into 'be hands of non-State actors, above all terrorists.
Given the growing terrorist threat and the fact that activities o! terrorist groups are acquiring multinational nature, the responsibility of Stales tor taking steps to prevent acts of nuclear terrorism is gaining great importance. The adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism became a significant step towards countering this threat. We call on the States that have not yet ratified this Convention to do so as soon as possible.
The American-Russian Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrotism launched during the G8 Summit in Saint Petersburg to mobilize States to implemeni the obligation they assumed under the already mentioned International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism as well as the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, UNSCR 1540 and other international legal instruments aims to contribute to solution of this problem. Tins initiative is open for accession by any State that shares its common goals and is strongly comnJned to combating nuclear terrorism. We call upon all States lo join in the work within the framework of this Initiative.
It is worthy to note the important role of the IAEA and the Agency's Nucieai Security Plan in the context of countering the nuclear terrorism threat,
Mr. Chairman,
We render full support to the IAEA program aimed at decreasing the level oi enrichment of nuclear fuel for research reactors in the third countries to less than 20 per cent. We believe that its implementation will allow to considerably reduce the risk of HEU proliferation.
The Russian-American agreement on cooperation in the field of withdrawing to Russia the fuel for research reactors manufactured in Russia lias been in force since 2004. Fresh nuclear fuel has already been withdrawal from Serbia. Romania Bulgaria, Libya, Uzbekistan, the Czech Republic, and Germany, while spent fuel n withdrawn from Uzbekistan. Work is underway to remove spent fuel from Latvia.
We appreciate the IAEA's active contribution towards implementing the programme to remove research reactor fuel to Russia, particularly m terms o> recovery and evaluating of condition of HEU kept at the research reactor sites.
It is only through a comprehensive and systemic appoach to the fulfil the NPT States Parties of their obligations under Article Hi of the I'rcan that be able to gain confidence in the peaceful nature of national ; a.clear prol an adequately respond to new threats and challenges and pre em r.on-deckued activities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.