Mr. Chairman,
Prevention of nuclear weapon proliferation is one of the key objectives under
the NPT. Only through achieving it a more secure and stable world could be ensured.
For fifty years the NPT has successfully coped with this task. The NPT
fundamental principles provide a solid foundation for addressing most complex
problems in the area of nuclear non-proliferation.
The conclusion

and

ongoing

practical

implementation

of the

Joint

Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on Iran's nuclear programme is best
confirmation. The Plan of Action is a balanced mechanism that takes into account the
interests of all its participants. The unbalancing of this fragile system of interests and
compromises will seriously affect international peace and security as well as global
non-proliferation regime. We noted the strong support for the JCPOA expressed by a
number of delegations at this session.
The collapse of the JCPOA without any reasons and against the will of the
international community will inevitably have a direct impact on ongoing efforts to
find a negotiated diplomatic solution to nuclear issue of the Korean ' Peninsula and
.

would hardly add to the confidence of the DPRK that any potential future
arrangement with Pyongyang would be observed;
We support the positive developments on the Korean Peninsula including a
number of high-level contacts with Pyongyang participation and recent statement by
the DPRK to suspend nuclear and missile tests ·and to close nuclear test range. We see
this decision as a big step towards easing tension on the Korean and pro~oting the
normalisation of the situation in Northeast Asia.
We welcome the developments on the peninsula that have taken a positive tum
along the lines of the respective joint initiative with a step-by-step roadmap plan that
has been proposed by Russia and China. According to this roadmap, the initial stage
of normalisation provides for a mutual freeze on military activities and the
development of direct contacts between North Korea, the United States and South
Korea, with subsequent multilateral talks held to find a comprehensive solution to all
.problems concerning the Korean Peninsula including nuclear issue.

3

Mr. Chairman,

The IAEA safeguards system has been and remains a basis for verification of
compliance by the states with their NPT obligations. The confidence of t~e member
states in the IAEA verification mechanism is the key factor that ensures sustainability
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. States must be confident that the safeguards
system is objective, depoliticized, technically credible, clear to them and based on
rights and obligations of the parties in accordance with the safeguards agreements
signed by them. If this confidence is undermined, this can deal a severe blow not only
to the Agency, but also to the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a whole.
Any reforms, modifications and improvements to the safeguards system should
not put into question the objective and depoliticized nature of the IAEA verification
mechanism. We stand for close political control over the introduction of the StateLevel concept into the IAEA practice. The IAEA member states should have a clear
understanding of all details of the safeguards system reform that is underway, in
particular as regards collection, analysis and the use of information. Any conclusions
on compliance with non-proliferation

obligations can be based on exclusively

credible information that the IAEA Secretariat could rely on in an open debate in the
Agency's policy-making bodies. Any information that cannot be proved as credible,
as well as subjective assessments such as "very likely" or "highly likely" should not
be accepted as evidence.
We consider greater transparency in the work of the Secretariat is crucial for
strengthening the credibility of the safeguards system.
We expect the IAEA Director-General's report on implementation of the StateLevel concept to safeguards with broader conclusions to be issued in the coming
days.
Based on the current and previous IAEA Director-General's

reports we can

conclude that the so-called State-Level safeguards as they stand now can only be
applied to non-nuclear

states that have signed additional protocols to their

comprehensive safeguards agreements. Otherwise there is no legal framework for
their application ·.

4

Mr. Chairman,

We find it necessary to ensure gradual strengthening of the IAEA safeguards
system through universalisation of the Additional Protocols that together with the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement should become a globally recognized
verification standard. At the same time, we stress that signing Additional Protocol
with the Agency remains a purely voluntary for the NPT States Parties.

Mr. Chairman,
We are deeply concerned about the current situation around the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). Washington's refusal to ratify the CTBT as well as
creation conditions for potential resumption of nuclear tests most seriously affects the
Treaty and tlie work of the CTBO Preparatory Commission.
Russia ratified the CTBT 18 years ago and has demonstrated its lasting
commitment to the Treaty. The President of the Russian Federation has repeatedly
reaffirmed our willingness to promote its early entry into force. We intend to
undertake every effort to make the CTBT an operational international treaty. As part
of these efforts we organized in Moscow in October 2017 the first CTBTO Youth
Group Conference. It contributed to facilitating cooperation among young people
from various countries to promote the Treaty. We plan to organize another event in
support of the CTBT in May 2018 in Vienna on the margins of the Science and
Diplomacy Symposium.
Today more than ever the CTBT needs support of the international community.
We cannot let this crucial international treaty fail. We call on all its advocators to join
efforts and launch a broad international campaign in, support of the CTBT. It is
crucial that the CTBT becomes a key issue on the agenda of international nonproliferation and disarmament fora. The upcoming September Friends of the CTBT
Ministerial meeting should stimulate further work on the CTBT.
The Nuclear Suppliers Group (the NSG) and the Zangger Committee continue
to demonstrate that a non-discriminatory, based on NPT provisions, and lacking any
detrimental consequences for civil nuclear cooperation exchange of fissile and
nuclear materials and relevant equipment is feasible.

5

The NSG, within its purely technical mandate, continues to prove its efficiency
in developing international rules and principles for export control of nuclear and
dual-use goods and technologies. We will make all effort to ensure that the NSG
continues to strengthen non-proliferation regime while at the same time not
undermining and creating inequitable obstacles to legitimate sensitive trade and
transfers.
We also stress the importance of preserving the Zangger Committee as an
export control mechanism established directly under the NPT. We emphasize that
Russia is building its national export control system on the basis of guidelines and
control lists compiled by the NSG and the Zangger Committee.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia is most actively engaged in negotiations on a possible Fissile Material
cut-off Treaty (FMCT) to prohibit production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
and other explosive devices, including the FMCT High Level Expert Preparatory
Group.
At the same time, we would lik~ to point out that debates over such a treaty are
well overdue. FMCT could have become an extremely valuable agreement in the late
1960s - early 1970s. In the course of time its added value has significantly dropped
as four nuclear powers introduced voluntary moratorium on the production of fissile
materials while non-nuclear states acceded to the NPT which de facto prohibits the
production of fissile materials.
Debates over the FMCT in various formats, including on the margins of the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, and at Expert Groups revealed that there is a
wide range of views on its possible modalities. Elaboration of the treaty will
obviously require a lot of preparatory work and there are no reasons to speed it up
artificially.
We stand ready for such negotiations if they are to take place exclusively at the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva within a balanced programme of work in
accordance with the mandate set out in the document CD/1299 (Shannon Mandate).
Diversion from this approach will undermine the entire work on the possible treaty.
Thank you , Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Chairman,
Colleagues,
The establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction (WMDFZ) in accordance with the 1995
Resolution on the Middle East is one of the central issues within the NPT review
process. As a co-sponsor of the mentioned resolution, Russia is seriously
concerned about the current situation around the WMDFZ. For the period since the
2015 Review Conference, no tangible progress has been gained in this area. We
approach the middle of the NPT review cycle with no results achieved. In case of
further lack of progress on this track we could find ourselves pressed for time once
again at the 2020 Review Conference.
Assertions that the NPT review process is not a most suitable format to
discuss the issue are misleading. The Resolution on the Middle East adopted at the
1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference was an important element of the
final document of the 1995 Conference based on which the NPT was extended
indefinitely.
As a co-sponsor of this Resolution, the Russian Federation for many years
has been making persistent and dedicated efforts aimed at its implementation. We
are ready to further facilitate this process. We believe that convening a WMDFZ
Conference remains a relevant and most feasible task in the context of the
implementation of the mentioned Resolution.
We should not procrastinate with convening a WMDFZ Conference, as well
as getting agreement on its organizational modalities and substantive aspects. Time
is running out for 2020. It is important to use it wisely in order to lay ground for
adopting a relevant decision at the Review Conference.
The proposals presented by the Russian Federation at the first session of the
Preparatory Committee in 2017 on convening a WMDFZ Conference could
become a good basis for that. We recall that Russian proposals found wide support
of Parties to the Treaty.

They were based on the following three key principles:
- All decisions on substantive matters at the Conference and within the
framework of its Preparatory process should be taken on the basis of consensus.
- Participation of all the States of the region without exception is desirable.
- Thorough preparatory work is required for reaching agreement on the
organizational modalities of the Conference (draft agenda, rules of procedure, final
document that would determine further steps on WMDFZ).
We think it would be useful to hold a meeting with the participation of
countries of the Middle East region, co-sponsors of the 1995 Resolution,
representative of the UN Secretary-General and future president of the Review
Conference to discuss all details of the relevant decision. It should be organized as
soon as possible but no later than early 2019. Geneva could become a venue for
such meeting.
For our part, we are ready to do our best to contribute to the preparation of
the event. We call on other co-sponsors of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East
– the US and the UK – to take the same honest position and immediately start a
constructive dialogue on this issue in the NPT framework without any
preconditions.
Thank you for your attention.

