2015 NPT REVIEW CONFERENCE - MAIN COMMITTEE II
STATEMENT OF SLOVENIA
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first to congratulate you for election to the post of the chair of this important committee. I
would like to assure you of my delegations's full support to your efforts to steer our work.
I would also like to align my statement to the statement of the European Union (EU), delivered by
Ambassador Zanathy last Monday.
Mr. Chairman,
Since the delegations who spoke before us have already covered most pertinent points, allow me to
underline three points important for Slovenia.
First, regarding the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Slovenia continues to
belive that the IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental component of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the NPT. In this context, Slovenia
commends the Agency and its staff for their efforts for further developing the State Level Concept.
Slovenia believes that this concept provides adequate response to the challenges posed to the IAEA
safeguards system. We have full confidence that the Agency together with its Member States will
further develop and refine elements of the State Level Concept in order to ensure its effective
implementation. We would like to propose to insert a reference of the State Level Concept to the
report of this Committee which would on behalf of the States Parties invite the Agency to continue
its efforts in this regard.
Second, Slovenia emphasises importance of appropriate effective export controls. Currently, Slovenia
takes part in all international export control regimes, except the MTCR, where we recently renewed
our candidature. Nonetheless, we implement export control of missile technology and related dualuse goods as a part of the European Union legislation in the field of export control of dual-use goods.
Slovenia is convinced that importance of international export regimes should be fully recognised by
the Review Conference. Slovenia calls upon all State Parties to improve their legal framework and
institutional capacities for enforcement of effective export controls in order to contribute concretely
to fighting proliferation.
Third, Slovenia regrets that a Conference on a Middle East Zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction did not take place. In that contex, we nonetheless welcome the
tireless efforts namely of the Facilitator, Ambassador Lajaava and the States of the region and the coconvenors to try to agree arrangements for a Conference attended by all States of the Middle East.
Slovenia urges all States ofthe region, supported by the Facilitator and the co-convenors, to continue
consultations in order to allow the convening of a Conference attended by all States of the Middle
East as soon as possible. We agree that convening a successful, inclusive Conference will be a
practical first step towards the long-held, common goal of the establishment of a Middle East zone
free from nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction that will significantly contribute to
international peace and security.
I thank you Mr. Chairman

