Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is a fundamental goal of the NPT regime. My delegation firmly believes that this goal can be achieved only when it is in harmony with the other two pillars of nuclear disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We also believe that the increasing proliferation challenges the NPT regime faces can be effectively addressed only through the concerted efforts of the State Parties to consolidate the NPT regime.
The universal application of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol is essential in ensuring confidence in State Parties' compliance with their Treaty obligations. Based upon this framework, the IAEA will be able to provide credible assurances not only on the non-diversion of declared materials but also on the absence of undeclared materials and activities, which will promote transparency and confidence among states. My delegation urges those States Parties that have yet to
conclude the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement or the Additional Protocol to do so without further delay. We also support the Protocol as a condition for the supply of nuclear materials and technologies.
Effective and robust export controls play an important role in achieving the goal of nuclear non-proliferation, as such controls regulate nuclear items and technologies with proliferation potential. My delegation appreciates the contribution made by the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) in this regard, especially in providing states with guidelines to establish and implement national policies on export controls. We support the efforts of the NSG to strengthen its export control regime.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation is of the view that the possible proliferation of nuclear weapons to non-state actors also poses a greater threat than previously anticipated. The threat of nuclear terrorism requires appropriate measures to prevent non-state actors from acquiring WMD and their means of delivery. In this context, my delegation believes that UN Security Council Resolution 1540 has provided an important legal framework not only in reinforcing the non-proliferation regime but also in countering nuclear terrorism. My delegation also welcomes the unanimous adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1810 last year which extended the mandate of the 1540 Committee for three additional years.
My delegation would like to take note that, in accordance with the 1540, all UN Member States have the responsibility to "take and enforce effective measures to establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation" of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery. In this regard, my delegation hopes that the resolution on "Preventing and Combating Illicit Brokering Activities," which was introduced by Korea and Australia at the UN General Assembly last year and adopted by consensus, could be a meaningful contribution to the global efforts in this area.
In the same vein, the Republic of Korea supports the efforts being made within the framework of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) as well as the role of the IAEA in this area. My delegation also would like to take note of the important role the G-8 Global Partnership plays in prohibiting weapons and materials of mass destruction from proliferating to non-nuclear weapon states and non-state actors. The G-8 Global Partnership, which facilitates economic and technical assistance among states, offers the State Parties a good example of international cooperation for nuclear non-proliferation. The Republic of Korea joined the G-8 Global Partnership in 2005, and has been contributing to various programmes under the partnership ever since.
My delegation is of the view that the North Korean nuclear issue is not only a threat to peace and stability 011 the Korean Peninsula and in the international community, but also a daunting challenge to the NPT regime. In this context, the early resolution of the DPRK nuclear issue is vital to securing lasting peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula and beyond, as well as to ensuring the integrity of the global nuclear nonproliferation regime. To this end, the Republic of Korea has exerted its strenuous efforts to achieve the verifiable denuclearization of the DPRK in a peaceful manner through the Six-Party Talks. However, it is regrettable that despite these efforts, the DPRK carried out a rocket launch in contravention of UN Security Council Resolution 1718, and announced that it would no longer participate in the Six-Party Talks and would restore and reactivate its nuclear facilities. The DPRK further threatened that it might test another nuclear device or more missiles.
My delegation urges the DPRK to fully comply with the obligations under the NPT as well as Resolution 1718, and to implement the 2005 Joint Statement and subsequent agreements adopted at the Six-Party Talks. The Republic of Korea will spare no efforts to make progress in the denuclearization process and highly values the continued unwavering support of the international community to this end.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation believes every effort to cope with any challenges should begin from the very basics, and the NPT regime is no exception. The universality of the NPT and its universal application still remain an unrealized goal. My delegation sincerely hopes our efforts here will bear fruitful results, demonstrate that this regime provides meaningful benefits to participants, and encourage all states outside the NPT to join us as non-nuclear weapon states.
Thank you.