SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
STATEMENT BY SOUTH AFRICA
CLUSTER ll
SAFEGUARDS, NON-PROLIFERATION AND NUCLEAR WEAPONS-FREE ZONES
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition and
the Non-Aligned Movement.

i

South Africa maintains its principled position that it is the obligation of States Parties to accept safeguards as
required under Article Ill of the Treaty and urges all States that have yet to bring comprehensive safeguards
agreements into force, to do so as soon as possible in order to achieve the universality of comprehensive
safeguards. South Africa further reiterates its conviction that the IAEA is the only internationally
recognized competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance with safeguards
agreements of States Parties.
My delegation continues to be of the view that as States Parties we have all committed ourselves to
provide the Agency with the necessary support and assistance to fulfil its safeguards and verification
mandate. It is therefore States Parties' obligation to provide all access, notifications, information and reports
required under their relevant safeguards agreements to the IAEA in full and on time.
Chairperson,
In both the 1995 and 2000 Conferences, NPT States Parties renewed their commitment to the
strengthening of IAEA safeguards. The 2010 Review Conference endorsed "the call by previous review
conferences for the application of IAEA comprehensive safeguards to all source or special fissionable
material in all peaceful nuclear activities in the States parties in accordance with the provisions of Article
Ill of the Treaty". In fact, South Africa believes that all States Parties need to ensure that all commitments
made under the Treaty are turned into concrete, verifiable and sustainable actions, in order to restore
international confidence in the nuclear disarmament and nuclear.non-proliferation regime.
South Africa has on numerous occasions and in various fora, including the NPT review process,
expressed its support for measures that would strengthen the safeguards system with a view to bolster
international efforts in addressing the serious challenge posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
My delegation looks forward to further discussions and consultations within the Board of the IAEA
regarding the Agency's efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of its safeguards. South Africa
appreciates the Agency's guidance and assistance in strengthening good practices, capacity and human
resources in all safeguards-related matters upon request of Member States.
South Africa continues to believe that safeguards contribute to establishing mutual confidence in the
peaceful nature of a State's nuclear activities and the absence of undeclared nuclear activities or material,
which in turn would greatly facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the
benefit of developing countries. At the same time, we should ensure that, in accordance with Article IV of
the NPT additional measures related to safeguards should not adversely affect the inalienable right to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy.
My delegation notes with appreciation that, since the 2010 Review Conference, five States Parties have
indeed complied with the provisions of Article Ill and have put Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
(CSA) in place. South Africa encourages the remaining 13 States Parties without a CSA to follow up on
their commitment.

While the Additional Protocol is riot an obligation under the Treaty, it is nonetheless an indispensable
instrument to enable the IAEA to provide credible assurances regarding the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities. South Africa believes that whilst it is the sovereign decision of any State
to conclude an Additional Protocol, once in force, the AP is an important tool to provide the necessary
confidence in the peaceful nature of a State's nuclear activities, especially with regard to States with
advanced nuclear programmes and facilities. My delegation is encouraged to note that nine States
Parties have brought an Additional Protocol into force, bringing the status of Additional Protocols to 119.
Chairperson,
My delegation recalls that an agreement was reached at the 2010 NPT Review Conference on certain
actions in relation to the IAEA aimed at strengthening the safeguards system, including through the
development of appropriate legally binding arrangements to ensure the irreversible removal of fissile material
designated by each nuclear weapon State as no longer required for military purposes. South Africa
welcomed this agreement and continues to reiterate its support for all measures that may strengthen the
safeguards system towards this goal. However, it is disappointing that no progress has been made thus
far for additional declarations of stockpiles of fissile material that could be used in nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices.
In addition, South Africa takes note that in addition to their voluntary offer agreements, the five nuclearweapon States have Additional Protocols in force, that the IAEA found no indication of the diversion of
nuclear material to which safeguards had been applied in 2011 and that nuclear material to which
safeguards had been applied in selected facilities, or parts thereof, remained in peaceful activities.
However, my delegation remains concerned that three nuclear-weapon States have withdrawn nuclear
material from such selected facilities as provided for in their respective agreements. It is therefore
deemed incumbent on the nuclear-weapon States to refrain from such withdrawals, applying the
principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency of their obligations under the NPT towards the
shared goal of nuclear disarmament.

It1

South Africa welcomes the agreement between the Russian Federation and the United States of America
to update their 2000 Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement in 2010, but regrets that no
further progress has been made in the development of appropriate legally-binding verification
arrangements with the IAEA. My delegation looks forward to an early conclusion of the draft trilateral
verification agreement between the Russian Federation, the United States of America and the IAEA to be
submitted to the IAEA Board of Governors for consideration.
Chairperson,
Turning to the issue of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZs), South Africa reiterates its firm conviction
that NWFZs play an important role in preventing the proliferation - both vertical and horizontal - of
nuclear weapons and reaffirms its view that the establishment of internationally recognized nuclearweapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned enhances global and regional peace and security and constitute important steps to strengthen
the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Although the nuclear-weapon States have a special role to eliminate their nuclear arsenals, nuclear
disarmament is the concern of all States, and in this regard, nuclear-weapon-free zones represent one of
the important building blocks in achieving nuclear disarmament. Moreover, considering the continuing
interest in nuclear energy and a rapid expansion of both nuclear power and non-power applications, the
treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones could play a role in promoting regional and sub-regional
programmes for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.
The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Pelindaba Treaty) has been ratified by 36 African States
and South Africa looks forward to progress with the remaining ratification and accession procedures by
African States. We further welcome the fact that four of the nuclear.weapon States have ratified the
Protocols to the Treaty they have signed, and encourage the remaining nuclear-weapon-State to

( 'i

I

complete its ratification process. We also encourage the one non-nuclear weapon State that has yet to
become party to Protocol Ill of the Treaty, to complete this process without delay.
My delegation further welcomes the ongoing clarifications regarding the concerns and reservations
related to the Bangkok Treaty (SEAWFZ) and would strongly encourage the P5 to sign the SEAWFZ
Protocol as soon as possible.
South Africa continues to support the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones and their establishment in all
regions of the world, including in the Middle East. South Africa is deeply concerned that the Middle East
Conference was not convened during 2012. South Africa views the 1995 resolution on the Middle East as
part of the package of decisions that enabled the indefinite extension of the Treaty in 1995 and we
therefore urge all States to redouble their efforts to ensure a gathering on this important issue involving all
States of the region at the earliest possible date.
Chairperson,
South Africa reiterates its support for the full implementation of the NPT, as well as its universal
application, in pursuit of the ultimate goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear weapons. We
therefore believe that the international community must redouble its efforts to achieve universal adherence to
the NPT, strengthen the multilateral institutions responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and
be vigilant against any steps that could undermine the determination of the international community as a
whole, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
I thank you

