STATEMENT
BY
AMBASSADOR XOLlSA MABHBMGO,
RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVE1GQVERNOR
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE IAEA

FIRST PREPAfUTORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY QN THE NOH-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER !I: SAFEGUARDS, RIBPI-PROLlFEMFION AND
NUCLEAR WEAPONS-FREE ZONES

7MAY 2012
VIENNA

Check against delivery

Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement,
South Africa maintains a principled position of universality of the NPT and the obligation
of States Parties to conclude the safeguards agreements as required under the Treaty.
We have all committed ourselves to provide the Agency with the necessairy support and
assistance to fulfill its safeguards and verification mandate, In various fora, South Africa
reiterates its view that in order to bolster our collective efforts to address the threat
posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons the existing safeguards system needs to
be strengthened. Such strengthened safeguards would contribute to establishing
mutual confidence in the peaceful uses of nuclear power, which in turn would greatly
facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the benefit
of developing countries. In this regard, my delegation calls upon those Member States
who still have to conclude safeguards agreements with the Agency to do so without
delay.
South Africa reiterates its conviction that the IAEA is the only internationally
recognized competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance
with safeguards agreements of Stales Parties, concluded in compliance with their
obligations under the NPT. It is therefore incumbent on all of us, who have
committed ourselves to provide the Agency with the necessary support and
assistance to fulfil its safeguards and verification mandate, to provide the required
information and reports under the relevant safeguards agreements to the Agency in a
comprehensive and timely manner.
Chairperson,
In both the 1995 and 2000 Conferences, NPT States Parties already committed to
the strengthening of IAEA safeguards. Action 24 of the 2010 Final document reendorsed "the call by previous review conferences for the application of IAEA
comprehensive safeguards to all source or special fissionable material in all peaceful
nuclear activities in the States parties in accordance with the provisions of Article ill
of the Treaty". My delegation notes with appreciation that, since the 2010 Review
Conference, four States Parties have indeed complied with the provisions of Article Ill
and have put Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements in place. South Africa
encourages the remaining 14 States Parties without a CFA to follow up on their
commitment. My delegation is encouraged to note that five States Parties have
brought an Additional Protocol into force, bringing the status of Additional Protocols
to 115.
South Africa reiterates its view that whilst the Additional Protocol is a voluntary
measure, my delegation believes it is relevant as a confidence building measure,
especially with regard to those States with advanced nuclear programmes and facilities.
Under the Additional Protocol the Agency has an important tool at its disposal that
strengthens the Agency's verification system and and enables it to provide credible
assurance about the absence of undeclared nuclear material or activities.
Chairperson,
South Africa wishes to recall that in 2010, the NPT Review Conference reaffimed the
unequivocal commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals and the continued validity of the practical steps
agreed to in 2000. Since the entry-into-force of the NPT, significant efforts have

been made d;o strengthen the lAEA safeguards system in non-nuciear-weapon
States, as requ~redunder Article ill of the NPT, in order to verify the non-diversion of
rluclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
dev~ces. In contrast, s~miiarefforts have not been undeeaken to strengthen
safeguards in &he nuclear-weapon States, specifically in suppod of nuclear
disarmament measures, despite the relevant ~ommitmentsmade in 200G and 2010
In this regard,
In this context, Soa"E Africa aligns itself witkt the MAC proposal, identiQfying"I@
need
for disarmament verificadon by the IAEA, and suppoding the view that under Adicls
Vi of the NPt- verification of nuclear disarmament measures forms an indispensable
edernent in the fulfillment of the nuclear disarmament obligations.
Chairperson,
Turning to the issue of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFzZs), South Afriw
miterates its firm conviction that NWFZs play art important role in preventing tne
proliferation - both vedica! and horizontal - of nuclear weapons. The outcome
documents of the Treaty on the NPX have reaffirmed the conviction that the
estabBishment of the internationaliy recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones or1 the
basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned
enhances global and regionai peace and security, strengthens the nuclear
nonyrolifefewtion regime and contributes towards realizing the objedives of nuclear
disamament.

'The Afrrcan Ncsclear-Vdeapon-Free Zone Treaty (Peiindaba Treaty) has to date been
ratified by 32 Africari Skates, and four of the nuclear-vdeapon States have ratified the
Protocols to the Treaty they have signed. Those States not yet pat@ ta the Treaty are
encouraged ta compkte their ratification or accession procedures as soon as
possible to enable all African States to be party to the Pelindaba Treaty. South Africa
calls upon the State Parties that have yet to complete the process of ratification to do
so without delay.
Chairperson,
South Africa supports the full implementation of the NPT, as well as its universal
application, rn pursuit sf the ultimate goal (36 achieving a world entirely free from
nuclear weapons. We therefore believe that the international communiw must
redouble its efforts ta achieve universal adherence to the NPT, strengtherr the
multilateral instgutions responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and be
v~giEantagainst any steps that could uiadennine the determination of Bile rnternational
communny as a whole, to prevent the protiferntion of nuclear weapons.
i thank you, Gharrperson.

