

30 April 2018
[Check against delivery]
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement.
South Africa supports the concept of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZs) on the
basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned and their
establishment in all regions of the wond where they do not yet exist, including in the
Middle East. South Africa reiterates its firm conviction that NWFZs play an important
role in preventing the proliferation - both vertical and horizontal - of nuclear weapons .
We believe that nuclear-weapon-free zones enhance global and regional peace and
security , strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and contribute towards
realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Pelindaba Treaty) has to date been
ratified by 40 African States, and four of the Nuclear-Weapon States have ratified the
Treaty Protocols. We therefore encourage the remaining nuclear weapon-State to
complete its ratification process of the Protocols it has signed, as well as the one nonnuclear weapon State that also needs to become party to Protocol Ill of the Treaty.
South Africa is honoured to host the African Commission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE)
which is mandated to monitor and support States Parties' compliance with their nonproliferation obligations, as well as promote cooperation in the peaceful, safe and
secure applications of nuclear sciences and technology.
The establishment of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle East is an issue of
special interest for Africa . This not only relates to the possible membership of some
African States to a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle East, but also, as noted
in the Pelinda ba Treaty, that the establishment of other nuclear-weapon-free zones,
especially in the Middle East, would enhance the security of States Parties to the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone .

We therefore reiterate our call for Israel to join the NPT and to place its nuclear facilities
under IAEA comprehensive safeguards. Such action on Israel's part would facilitate the
implementation of the resolution adopted by the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference on the establishment of the Middle East Zone free of nuclear weapons and
all other weapons of mass destruction which was subsequently reaffirmed in 2000 and
2010. It is important to recall in this regard that this resolution was an essential element
of the outcome the 1995 Review Conference, which amongst others, is the basis on
which States agreed to the indefinite extension of the Treaty.
Chairperson
South Africa supports the full implementation of the NPT. as well as its universal
application, in pursuit of the goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear
weapons. We therefore believe that the international community must continue to
promote universal adherence to the NPT, strengthen the multilateral institutions
responsible for disarmament and non-proliferation issues, and be vigilant against any
steps that could undermine efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Chairperson

2

Chairperson,
I associate myself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and would like to share some additional views in my national capacity .
As already pointed out in our statement during the General Debate, South Africa
believes that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing
processes and that both elements are essential to attain - and maintain - a world free of
nuclear weapons . We therefore strongly support efforts aimed at promoting nuclear
non-proliferation , provided that such efforts do not result in conditionalities being
imposed on access to technology for peaceful purposes to countries, especially
developing countries.
My delegation therefore supports the International Atomic Agency's (IAEA) efforts to
strengthen its safeguards system. We believe that this will contribute to mutual
confidence in the peaceful nature of a State's nuclear activities and the absence of
undeclared nuclear activities or material. It is our view that strengthened safeguards
should facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and the peaceful use of nuclear
energy to the benefit of developing countries . Nuclear energy not only provides for the
expanded opportunity to generate power for our development, but we also derive
benefit from its application in areas such as health, nutrition and agriculture
Chairperson ,
The IAEA remains the only internationally recognized competent authority responsible
for verifying and assuring compliance with NPT safeguards agreements . In this regard,
it remains South Africa's view that the Additional Protocol is an indispensable instrument
which enables the IAEA to build confidence and provide credible assurances regarding
the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities . Whilst the conclusion of an
Additional Protocol remains a voluntary act by sovereign States, it is an extremely
important confidence building measure , specifically in States with advanced nuclear
programmes and facilities .

1

South Africa continues to work closely with the Agency with regard to safeguards
implementation in the country. Having drawn the broader conclusions in South Africa for
the first time in 2010, confirming that there was no indication of diversion of declared
nuclear material from peaceful nuclear activities and no indication of undeclared nuclear
material or activities, the IAEA started implementing the Integrated Safeguards
approach in July 2015 . We are pleased that South Africa continues to maintain its
broader conclusion .
Considering the significant costs of implement ing safeguards globally, my delegation
has always held the view that the implementation of integrated safeguards was intended
to ensure savings through the reduction of inspections in the field and which would in
tum decrease the burden on the Member State given the decrease in Agency staff
inspections . We trust that a cost benefit analysis will bear this out in the long term.
Chairperson ,
It is regrettable that little progress has been made to implement the actions agreed to at
the 201 0 NPT RevCon in the development of appropriate legally-binding verification
arrangements with the IAEA to ensure the irreversible removal of fissile material
designated by each nuclear-weapon State as no longer required for military purposes.
Neither has there been progress with regard to additional declarations of stockpiles of
fissile material that could be used in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices.
Chairperson
We need to strengthen the multilateral institutions responsible for disarmament and nonproliferation issues, and be vigilant against any steps that could undermine the
determination of the international community as a whole, to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons . However, we should not forget that even if all civilian materials were
safeguarded and fully secured to the highest standards, this would only cover an
estimated 15% of the weapons-usable material around the world, leaving a critical gap
in the nuclear non-proliferation architecture . Hence, we should not lose sight of the
remaining 85%, which is categorized as military materials that are not subject to any
international security standards or oversight mechanisms .
We should therefore remain vigilant of the risks inherent in the continued existence of
nuclear weapons and high-risk, unsafeguarded material that fall outside international
oversight, as well as those posed by nuclear terrorism, the illicit nuclear network and
criminal acts aimed at using nuclear or other radioactive material for malicious acts. For
its part, South Africa remains committed to maintaining effective nuclear nonproliferation controls consistent with its international obligations, and to cooperating with
other States to combat the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
I thank you, Chairperson .

2



