

Mr Chairman.
As we progress in this review cycle, addressing both positive and negative developments with regard to nuclear
non-proliferation will be essential in order to identify outstanding challenges and ways to meet them.
To that end, Switzerland would like to draw attention to the following points:
As we stressed during the general debate, the case of the DPRKis a major source of concern, both in terms
of nuclear non-proliferation and in terms of the threat that it poses to international security. Switzerland
repeatedly condemned both its nuclear and ballistlc missile tests and called upon the DPRK to re-join the NPT
as a Non-Nuclear Weapon State.
Switzerland recognises the historic character of the inter~Korean summit which took place today at
Panmunjom. It welcomes this rapprochement.
Switzerland especially welcomes the commitment of the two leaders to establish a lasting peace on a
denuclearised Korean peninsula. Switzerland firmly believes that a solution to the nuclear and security issues
on the Korean peninsula can only be found within the framework of an inclusive diplomatic process. This is
why it encourages the parties to pursue the dialogue in a constructive spirit.
As we seek to address the challenge posed by the DPRK, we should recall that we have been able to find a
diplomatic outcome to issues that long seemed intractable. The entry into effect on 16 January 2016 of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA} between Iran and the E3/EU+3 represents a historic

success for the second pilfar of the NPT
Reports by the IAEA show that the Islamic Republic of Iran implements faithfully the provisions as set
out in the JCPOA. Switzerland notes with satisfaction that the IAEA has conducted complementary access
under the Additional Protocol to all sites and locations which it needed to visit. And although certain
provisions in the agreement are temporary, the implementation of the highest standard of nuclear
verification in the form of a comprehensive safeguards agreement and additional protocol, are not
limited in time. We encourage all parties involved to continue to fully implement their obligations under the
JCPOA.
Any actions running counter to the JCPOA would not only undermine the agreement but also the credibility of
non-proliferation efforts and international and regional security and stability. The JCPOA should not be
instrumentalised in order to address security issues of a non-nuclear nature.
lf these and similar non-proliferation challenges are to be successfully addressed, a number of consideration
must be taken into account.
First. we would like to point out that, since the entry into force of the NPT, much has been achieved in the area
of non-proliferation and in strengthening the safeguards system. This progress constitutes a notable
contribution to international security. At the same time, Switzerland would like to recall that the NPT is based
on a bargain. Under the terms of the treaty, the nuclear-weapon States committed themselves to conducting
negotiations on nuclear disarmament in good faith in exchange for a commitment on the part of the nonnuclear-weapon States to refrain from acquiring or developing nuclear weapons and to accept verification
through the IAEA. This compromise is vital to the proper functioning of the NPT.
Second: Nearly half of the States possessing nuclear weapons are not party to the NPT. Switzerland is of the
view that efforts must continue to universalise the norms of non-proliferation by seeking creative solutions that
make adherence to norms similar to those of the NPT a viable option for non-NPT States.
It is here that export control groups such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the NSG, currently chaired by
Switzerland, make an important contribution. By establishing lists of nuclear and dual-use goods, the NSG
facilitates the implementation of national export control legislations and thus plays a crucial role in the
universalisation of nuclear non-proliferation norms. Switzerland therefore encourages all States to apply the
guidelines of the NSG.
Third and finally with respect to the IAEA safeguards system. Switzerland is of the view that a Comprehensive
Safeguard Agreement combined with an Additional Protocol should become a standard applied by all.
3

Furthermore, in order for the system to remain sustainable and effective in the long-run continuous
improvement is necessary. The main challenges for such an optimization are the increasing quantity of nuclear
material and installations as well as information and agreements that require verification, all within the context
of ongoing budgetary constraints. It was to that end that the "state-level concept" was developed to enable the
!AEA to consider the overall situation in each State as a whole and to focus its efforts where they are most
needed.
In Switzerland's view , it is essential that the "state-level concept" leads to a substantive and measurable
improvement in the safeguards system. This is particularly the case with regard to States that have
implemented the highest current non-proliferation standard. We took forward to the report of the Director
General of the IAEA with regard to the lessons learned and experience gained in state-level approaches
applied so far. including a cost-benefit analysis.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your attention.

4

