Seul le texte prononcé fait foi
Check against delivery

2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons: New York, 27 April – 22 May 2015
Main Committee II: Nuclear Security
New York, 7 May 2015
Statement by H.E. Rolf Stalder
Deputy Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the IAEA

The peaceful use of nuclear energy goes hand in hand with States' responsibility for nuclear security.
As an act of nuclear terrorism could have repercussions far exceeding the borders of any particular
State, strengthening nuclear security should also be a matter of global concern. Although we
recognize that nuclear security is a State responsibility, Switzerland is of the opinion that efforts at the
multilateral level should be reinforced. Switzerland is therefore calling on States which have not yet
done so to adhere to the instruments constituting the cornerstone of the multilateral architecture of
nuclear security, so as to ensure their universality as soon as possible. These essential instruments
are the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its 2005 amendment, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Code of Conduct on
the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources.
Switzerland is also of the opinion that we must anticipate new challenges, including cyber-attacks, and
more globally those related to the issue of attacks on nuclear installations, as well as nuclear materials
in use for industrial and medical purposes.
Switzerland has played an active part in the work of the various Nuclear Security Summits. As the
2016 Summit may well conclude a series begun in 2010, it is important that a platform is retained to
continue the substantial work done so far. Given its expertise and almost universal composition, the
IAEA is the most suitable forum for a task of this kind, and for coordinating the other efforts being
made in this area. In this context, Switzerland encourages the States Parties to use the opportunity of
the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security, which the IAEA will be organising in December 2016,
to define the future role of the Agency in this area.

Mission permanente de la Suisse auprès des Nations Unies
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Tél. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny

Switzerland would like to stress that, at this stage, the multilateral architecture for nuclear security is
incomplete as long as it concentrates its efforts mainly on the materials related to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. 85% of all nuclear materials are under military control. This vast amount of sensitive
nuclear material remains outside the safeguard system and international control. However, in order to
be credible, an international nuclear security regime must cover all existing nuclear materials,
including those under military control. In addition, it also should extend to all States capable of
producing nuclear materials. A regime of this kind must possess mechanisms similar to the peerreview missions performed in the field of nuclear safety. Switzerland points out that the various
Nuclear Security Summits, as well as the 2013 IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security,
acknowledged the importance of securing all nuclear materials, including those used for military
purposes. Switzerland will continue to be active in this area, with other countries, in the run-up to the
2016 Nuclear Security Summit.

2

