There is no doubt that since the 2nd Session of the Preparatory Committee in 2008, the subject of nuclear proliferation - particularly from a regional perspective - has been subject to developments which have made it a major concern for international security. I would like to illustrate this situation by referring to the following examples:
■	Firstly, the situation in the Korean peninsula has not improved since the October 2005 agreement between the U.S. and the DPRK on a verification mechanism. In fact it has worsened considerably since the launch of a missile by the DPRK on 5 April 2009.
■	Secondly, because of the lack of cooperation by Iran, the IAEA is still not able to confirm the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme, and this dossier has not made notable progress towards a solution.
■	Thirdly, the IAEA is yet waiting responses to its questions related to Syria. Mr President,
Let me be very clear. Switzerland does not wish in any way to play down the responsibility of any States with regard to their non-proliferation obligations. However, it seems to us that other factors are involved which to differing degrees have an influence on the development of these proliferation issues and complicate their solution. We are all witnesses of the fact that - under the agenda item that we are now discussing - we are hearing to often words of frustration, of discrimination and of double-standards.
Mr President,
Switzerland believes that the resolution of the questions related to proliferation will necessitate the reactivation of the philosophy of compromise of the NPT and will necessitate a re-adjustment of the undertakings given by the States parties with regard to each of the three pillars. I would now like to outline what this would mean in practice:
■	Firstly and immediately. The emphasis would have to be placed on nuclear disarmament, which has not made sufficient progress. As the UK delegation has rightly stated yesterday, "nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are mutually reinforcing". As president Obama acknowledged in his speech on 3 April 2009 to mark the 60th anniversary of NATO, substantive results in the field of disarmament can give nuclear-weapon States the "moral authority" needed to persuade certain non-nuclear-
weapon States to forgo nuclear weapons ambitions. Substantial effort on nuclear disarmament will also be necessary to convince States that are not yet parties to the NPT but that possess nuclear weapons, whether officially or not, to disarm.
■	Secondly, and in the long term. A profound change of relationship between States within the NPT seems to be indispensable, whether these States possess nuclear weapons or not, whether they are developed or developing States and whether such States possess or do not possess so-called sensitive technologies. This change will require in particular to have a fresh look at the basic philosophy of technical cooperation. For instance, how can we avoid of being accused of "double-standards" in the case of the exception granted to India in August 2008? How can developing countries be convinced of the importance of respecting the link between Article IV and Article III when the current discussions in the NSG, such as the ongoing debate on the nuclear fuel cycle, or such as the large increase in the IAEA budget earmarked for safeguards, are perceived by them as to be designed solely to limit their access to nuclear technology?
■	Thirdly - whether we like it or not - some of the most pressing concerns regarding horizontal proliferation are located to the Middle East. Here more than elsewhere the perception of "double standards" is exacerbated, particularly by the non-implementation of the 1995 Resolution calling for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Here more than in other cases the problem goes far beyond the framework of the NPT alone and will require key actors to adopt a new and balanced approach. In this context, Switzerland hopes that the new US approach to the Iranian issue will help to reverse the current deadlock.
■	Fourthly. The three points enumerated above are not sufficient in themselves to curb proliferation. It will also be necessary for developed States that supply nuclear technology not to limit their perspectives on short-term profits in their nuclear cooperation with recipient States but together with these States to implement a genuine policy of cooperation in the development of civilian nuclear technology that incorporates all the safety and security parameters.
Mr President,
To conclude, Switzerland stresses that since the beginning of the year a number of
encouraging signals have been given, particularly in the form of new stated commitments
in the field of nuclear disarmament. We therefore encourage all States parties to make their own contribution, in order to reduce the current gaps within the NPT and to ensure that the non-proliferation regime will be strengthened by the current review process.
Mr President, thank you for your attention.