2

Mr Chairman,
As a new review cycle begins, it will be particularly useful to make a clear assessment of the present status
of nuclear non-proliferation, so that we can identify the principal challenges and determine the means by
which they can be addressed.
To that end, Switzerland would like to draw attention to the following points:
First, the entry into effect on 16 January 2016 of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on Iran’s
nuclear programme undeniably represents a major success for the second pillar of the NPT. Reliance on
diplomacy has made it possible to resolve one of the most sensitive non-proliferation cases of the past
decade. At this stage, reports by the IAEA indicate that the nuclear component of that agreement is working
well. Switzerland welcomes this positive development, which contributes towards strengthening the credibility
of the non-proliferation regime in place. We encourage all parties involved in the issue to continue to fully
implement their obligations under the JCPOA and to refrain from any actions that would run counter to the
objectives of that agreement.
At the same time, however, that success should not lead us to forget that other existing and newly emerging
nuclear non-proliferation challenges remain to be addressed. In this connection, my delegation would like to
call attention to the following four points:
First. As we noted during the general debate, the case of the DPRK is currently a major source of
concern, both in terms of nuclear non-proliferation and in terms of the threat it poses to international
security. That situation requires a firm signal from the NPT State Parties, as it underlines the importance
of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the CTBT.
Second. Since the entry into force of the NPT much progress has been made in the area of nonproliferation and in the safeguards system. This progress is to be welcomed, as it constitutes a notable
contribution to international security. At the same time, Switzerland would like to recall that the NPT is
based on a bargain. Under the terms of the treaty, the nuclear-weapon States committed themselves to
nuclear disarmament in exchange for a commitment on the part of the non-nuclear-weapon States to
refrain from acquiring or developing nuclear weapons and to accept IAEA verifications. That compromise
is vital to the proper functioning of the NPT.
Third. Nearly half of the States possessing nuclear weapons are not party to the NPT. Switzerland
nevertheless takes the view that efforts must continue to universalise the norms of non-proliferation by
seeking creative solutions that make adherence to norms similar to those of the NPT a viable option for
non-NPT States.
It is here that export control groups such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the NSG, make an important
contribution. By establishing lists of nuclear and dual-use goods, the NSG facilitates the implementation
of national export control legislations and thus plays a crucial role in the universalisation of nuclear nonproliferation norms. Switzerland therefore encourages all States to apply the guidelines of the NSG.

3

Fourth and final point, the IAEA system of safeguards. If Switzerland is of the view that a Comprehensive
Safeguard Agreement combined with an Additional Protocols should become a standard applied by all, it
is also of the strong view that – for this to be sustainable and effective in the long run – the safeguards
system needs to be optimized. Reason for that is the challenge posed by the increasing quantity of
nuclear material and installations as well as information and agreements that require verification, all
within the context of ongoing budgetary constraints. It was to that end that the “state-level concept” was
developed to enable the IAEA to consider the overall situation in each State as a whole and to focus its
efforts where they are truly required.
In Switzerland’s view, it is essential that the “state-level concept” lead to a substantive and measurable
improvement in the safeguards system. This is particularly the case with regard to States that have
implemented the highest current non-proliferation standard. Should it emerge that the state-level concept
is unable to meet this objective, Switzerland believes that a new approach will have to be developed. At
issue here is the long-term capacity of the IAEA to perform the mandate conferred upon it by Article 3 of
the NPT.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your attention.

4

