Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
351 EAST 52ND STREET· NEW YORK, NY 10022
TEL (212) 754-2230 •FAX (212) 688-3029

Statement
by

the Delegation of Thailand
for the General Exchange of Views of Main Committee II
of the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, May 2015

Building Bridges for Partnarship
THAILAND
ASEAN Candidate for Iha UN Security Council 2017 - 2018

-2-

Chairperson,
I join other speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the
Chairmanship of this important Main Committee. My delegation has full
confidence in your experience, leadership and guidance which we trust will lead
us to a successful conclusion of our deliberations.
Thailand would also like to associate itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of NAM. Allow me
a brief intervention to highlight some points that are of particular importance for
my delegation.
Chairperson,
For Thailand, it bears repeating that comprehensive safeguards
agreements under the aegis of the IAEA are fundamental to the non-proliferation
regime. We believe, therefore that strengthened international safeguards and
verification arrangements under the IAEA will go a long way to build confidence
among states parties. We also believe we need to do more to promote the
universality of these safeguards agreements.
Also fundamental to a robust non-proliferation regime is action,
partnership and a recognition of our shared responsibilities and common
interests. Nuclear non-proliferation remains a serious challenge for the
international community despite the immense efforts that have been and continue
to be exerted. The international security landscape is constantly evolving and the
international community must keep up in order to deal effectively with sources
of insecurity and in order to promote peace and security in a meaningful manner.
In this regard, we believe the NPT must continue to be strengthened while
at the same time supplemented by concerted and collective efforts wherever
possible, whether within the NPT or in support of it and its non-proliferation
efforts:
1. Nuclear-weapon-free-zones must continue to play a unique role in
supporting the non-proliferation regime and we continue to urge the zones to
learn from one another and share their experiences in this regard. In the Middle
East, where such a zone would have such potential for positive impact yet has
sadly failed even to materialize in its most preliminary stages, we strongly urge
the parties to live up to their obligations not only under the NPT but in the
interest of sustainable peace and security in that region.

,.
-3-

2. Initiatives that foster practical partnership and effective and strong
networks to promote non-proliferation, such as the Nuclear Security Summit, the
Global Initiative against Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation Security
Initiative, are all critical. They promote the necessary cooperation needed in
obstructing the acquisition of nuclear weapons and related materials by non-state
actors and collectively send a strong signal of political commitment to the goals
of non-proliferation.
3. Further efforts on Security Council resolution 1540 to promote and
expand engagement on its objectives by all UN member states can broaden
ownership and further strengthen implementation.
4. Within the context of the IAEA, the agency should continue to serve as
the focal point in promoting the physical protection of nuclear material and assist
member states in efforts to prevent illicit trafficking in nuclear and other
radioactive materials.
5. Finally, an area that Thailand feels has more potential than is currently
being explored is in the area of promoting education, raising awareness as well
as in particular, exploring the positive and practical role and engagement of the
general public on non-proliferation efforts. Thailand has garnered a recognized
and notable level of success in dealing with traditional and non-traditional
threats to peace and security by adopting a multi-stakeholder approach to
managing and addressing those threats. Let us place a more critical and creative
eye on how we can more effectively and appropriately expand our engagement
with all sectors of society, public and private, industry and academia and civil
society on non-proliferation efforts at the national, regional and international
levels.
I thank you, Chairperson.

**************

