We explained our position on the NPT in our general statement on 6 May 2009. Today, I have taken the floor to elaborate our position on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, safeguards and nuclear-weapon free zones.
There can be no doubt that a world free of nuclear weapons clearly depends on a reliable non-proliferation regime. However, success of these regimes depends not only on adoption of treaties and other instruments. Effective and universal implementation of these instruments is equally important.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been serving competently on the implementation of the NPT. International safeguards system of the IAEA is the fundamental tool in non-proliferation efforts. In this context, Turkey recognizes the need for the further strengthening and universalization of the verification authority of the IAEA. We therefore continue to advocate that the IAEA's comprehensive safeguards and the Additional Protocol should be endorsed and implemented as the current verification standard.
We are encouraged by the fact the number of States adhering to the Additional Protocol is on the rise. Nevertheless, we need universal implementation of this instrument in order to ensure that peaceful nuclear programs do not run the risk of diversion into weapons programmes. Hence, we call on all States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and implement the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement, as well as the Additional Protocol as early as possible.
This issue is also closely linked to the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to develop research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty. We will present our views on the peaceful use of nuclear energy under Cluster 3.
As regards non-proliferation, we need to remain vigilant on the risk of nuclear terrorism, as well as illicit trade in sensitive nuclear equipment and technology. Utmost attention should be paid to combating terrorism and preventing terrorists from gaining access to nuclear material and other components of weapons of mass destruction. In this context, we call for adherence to and effective implementation of two important international conventions, namely "the Convention on Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism" and the "Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material".
States Parties should take al! required measures to prevent illegal trading of nuclear material and technology. In this context, we wish to underscore the importance of UNSC resolution 1540, which serves as an important complementary tool in our efforts to tackle proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, particularly by non-state actors. Turkey attaches great importance to the scrupulous implementation of UNSC resolution 1540. We are encouraged by the recent intensification of the efforts to promote the full implementation of resolution 1540. And we look forward to the process of comprehensive review on the status of implementation of all aspects of this resolution, including outreach, dialogue, assistance and cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
We believe that coordinated implementation of the export controls, particularly raising awareness at the national level and thus implementing effective controls at the origin, contributes to the non-proliferation objectives of the NPT. At the same time, upholding the core principles of the Treaty and, in particular, development of and cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear energy is equally important. Creating dividing lines among the international community is one thing we should strive to avoid.
Against this background, we would like to underline the works of the Zangger Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers' Group with appreciation. Turkey will continue to contribute to the work of these mechanisms with a view to establishing and sustaining transparency in nuclear related exports.
Mr. Chairman,
As we have repeatedly underlined in different fora, Turkey supports the alleviation of the ongoing crisis of confidence between Iran and the international community as regards the scope and nature of Iran's past and current nuclear programs through peaceful means.
We welcome the stated willingness of the P5+1 to continue engagement with Iran, We hope that the diplomatic process will gain a fresh and positive momentum and call for the active involvement of Iran and P5+1 aiming at finding a negotiated solution to the nuclear issue.
We observed with grave concern the recent launch by the DPRK, as well as the subsequent decision of the DPRK authorities to withdraw from the Six Party Talks and carry on with their nuclear program. We believe that such steps could further undermine stability, mutual trust and confidence in the region. We therefore call on the DPRK to suspend its nuclear and missile-related programs and return to the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state.
Turkey remains fully supportive of the Six-Party Talks and considers these talks as the best vehicle to achieve this goal. We therefore call on all the parties, and the DPRK in particular, to resume these talks at the earliest possible date with a renewed determination to make concrete and irreversible progress towards achieving lasting peace, security and stability in the region.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey highly values the establishment of zones, free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, wherever practically feasible. In this context, Turkey supports the establishment of an effectively verifiable zone, free of all such weapons and their means of delivery in the Middle East. Our President recently reiterated our call to this end and stressed the fact that acquiring weapons of mass destruction does not enhance the security of any country while, on the contrary, bringing additional instability to the Middle Eastern region. We encourage all efforts for developing a common regional understanding on this project, with the participation of all parties concerned.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.