Check Against Delivery

Statement by UAE
NPT PrepCom May 7th 2012

- Cluster 2- General Issues

Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad AI Kaabi,
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the IAEA
Mr. Chairman,
There is no question that States developing nuclear energy for peaceful uses should
fully comply with their safeguards obligations; cooperate with the IAEA; and take
required steps to fully address all international concerns and obligations including
those deriving from relevant IAEA and UNSC resolutions.
The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement is designed to provide the full credible
assurance of the peaceful nature of all declared activities.

However, without an

additional protocol, the issue of possible undeclared activities is not addressed.
Therefore, it is essential to enhance the assertions provided by the safeguards
agreements through

utilizing the tools

supplied

by the additional

protocol.

Implementing the additional protocol as an integral part of the safeguards regime, will
provide the confidence in the exclusive peaceful nature of national programs, and
facilitate the full support of the international community. UAE has brought in force
the additional protocol since 2010.
The Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), which UAE is a party of,
has launched an initiative to undertake specific actions including the promotion of the
Additional Protocol (AP). The NPDI has submitted a working paper to this
preparatory committee in which we present our analysis of challenges related to the
implementation of Action 28 of the NPT RevCon 2010 Action Plan which states that

"The Conference encourages all State parties which have not yet done so to
conclude and to bring into force additional protocols as soon as possible and to
implement them provisionally pending their entry into force".
We welcome the increase of the number of states that have implemented an AP, an
increase by 14 states since the end of 2010 NPT RevCon. However, there are still a

number of states that have not signed or brought into force an AP. Various reasons
are presented by states for not bringing the AP into force. Some states have
attributed this to the political process required for implementation, while others have
identified the lack of expertise and/or resources to implement the AP effectively, or
other legal challenges.
To seek adherence to the requirements of the AP in those states, it is necessary and
expedient to assist these states in this process, especially in remediating the
absence of legal or technical capacity for effective implementation of the AP. In this
context, the NPOI has highlighted that it is needed to provide guidance and
assistance in order to develop national processes, and build the required domestic
infrastructu re.
We urge all states that have not yet concluded an AP with IAEA to do so as soon as
possible, and to implement its provisions pending ratification. We strongly encourage
further work for achieving the universalization of the AP, through the combined efforts
of NPT States Parties and the IAEA, as well as through regional initiatives that would
enhance national capacities and awareness. In this field training conducted by the
IAEA is vital and should be supplemented by states' efforts and contribution of
expertise.
The NPOI had followed up on Actions 28 and 29 by writing a joint letter to the
Oirector General of the IAEA offering to share the group's collective experience in
concluding and implementing an AP with states that do not yet have them in force.
Mr. Chairman,
The Non-proliferation pillar of the treaty is very crucial. Yet, IAEA safeguards system
has been challenged frequently by the failure to provide credible assurance on the
exclusive peaceful nature of nuclear activities in some states, and in some cases was
not able to exclude the possible military dimension after years of efforts. In this
context, we call on Iran to fully address Agency's serious concerns about the possible
military

dimension~

of its nuclear program, and to fully cooperate with IAEA and

implement its international obligations.

Given the importance of non-proliferation pillar to the objective of the treaty, it is
imperative that the NPT review process address such challenges, including noncompliance issues. States should fulfill their international obligations including those
of UNSC and IAEA board resolutions and cooperate with the IAEA in substance to
fully address the international concerns.

