Check Against Delivery
Statement by United Arab Emirates
NPT PrepCom - April 2014-Cluster 2- General Issues
Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad Al Kaabi,
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the IAEA
Mr. Chairman,
The Non-proliferation pillar of the treaty, and in particular the IAEA safeguards
system has been challenged in the past andcontinue, in some cases, to fail to
provide the required assurance on the exclusive peaceful nature of nuclear
activities in some states.
States developing nuclear energy for peaceful uses should fullyadhere to
comprehensive safeguards obligations; fully cooperate with the IAEA; and take
required steps to fully address all international concerns and obligations
including those of relevant IAEA and UNSC resolutions.
The Comprehensive Safeguards Agreementis designed to provide a credible
assurance of the peaceful nature of all declared activities. However without
bringing into force anAdditional Protocol,the issue of possible undeclared
activities is not addressed. Therefore it is essential to enhancethe assertions
provided by the Safeguards Agreement through utilizing the tools supplied by
the Additional Protocol.
Implementing an Additional Protocol as an integral part of the safeguards
system , will provide the confidence in the exclusive peaceful nature of national
nuclear activitiesboth declared and undeclared and will facilitate the full
support and confidence of the international community. We welcome the
increase in number of states that have brought into force an AP, reaching 122
states , a substantive progress since 2010 NPT RevCon. However there are still
a number of states that have not signed or brought into force an AP. My
delegation urges all states that have not yet concluded an AP with the IAEA to
do so as soon as possible.

Mr. Chairman,
It is regrettable that the IAEA ,After years of efforts, has not been able to
report substantive progress on addressing outstanding issues in relation to
Iran’s nuclear programme , including those related to the possible military
dimension
It has now been more than two years since the IAEA has published its detailed
report in November of 2011 , and its annex under the title “possible military
dimensions”, containing a list of outstanding and concerning issues in relation
to Iran’s nuclear programme.
The international community has stressed that it is essential for Iran and the
Agency to intensify their dialogue aiming at the urgent resolution of all
outstanding issues concerning its nuclear program andto exclude the existence
of a possible military dimension. This was affirmed by multiple resolutions of
the IAEA Board of Governors and UN Security Council, which called on Iran to
take the required steps by providing access without delay to all sites,
equipment, personnel and documents requested by the Agency.
My delegation continues to support diplomacy and dialogue as the only way
to address Iran’s nuclear issues , however we remained concerned that no
substantive progress has yet been achieved in reaching a comprehensive
agreement to address all outstanding issues including those referred to as the
possible military dimension issues.
Concrete results are needed to build confidence in the exclusive peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
We therefore continue to call on Iran to fully address the Agency’s serious
concerns regarding the possible military dimension, and to engage with the
Agency substantively on all outstanding issues. We encourage Iran to spare no
efforts in building confidence in its nuclear activities, and to work closely with
the IAEA to achieve such objective.The UAE further encourages all Member
States to contribute positively to that effect.
Mr. Chairman ,
Given the importance of non-proliferation pillar to the objective of the treaty, it
is imperative that the NPT review process addressessuch challenges, including
non-compliance issues. States should fulfill their international obligations and
fully address the international concerns. Safeguards system credibility must be
maintained and strengthened in line with the of NPT objectives.

