2018 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Geneva 23 April - 4 May 2018

Pillar II

Statement by the United Kingdom

Mr Chairman,
The United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union. I would now like to add further remarks in our
national capacity.

The current non-proliferation regime is being tested. It is vital that the NPT remains fit
for purpose in a world where we continue to face threats to international peace and
security. The United Kingdom is committed to strengthening the non-proliferation
architecture, combating programmes of concern and building trust between
neighbours. The UK has consistently been at the forefront of international efforts to
tackle proliferation. We devote substantial efforts to this.

Mr Chairman

The UK remains concerned about the DPRK's nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes, posing a serious threat to international peace, security and the global
non-proliferation regime. We welcomed the inter-Korean leaders' summit and Kim
Jong Un's pledge to refrain from further nuclear 'or missile tests while dialogue
continues. We welcome the prospect of direct talks between Kim Jong Un and
President Trump. But until the DPRK matches its words with concrete actions we
continue to work with international partners to keep up pressure and strictly enforce
existing measures until the DPRK embarks on a credible path towards complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearisation . We also urge the DPRK to comply with its
international obligations under multiple UNSCRs, sign and ratify the CTBT, and return
1

to compliance with the NPT and the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement.
The UK has worked closely with UNSC partners throughout the development and
adoption of these UNSCRs and we call upon all States to fully and effectively
implement them. We are clear that the DPRK cannot have the status of a nuclear
weapon State in accordance with the NPT.

We hope Kim Jong Un's talks with

President Moon and the prospect of talks with President Trump demonstrates he is
heeding the clear message to the DPRK that only a change of course can bring the
security and prosperity it claims to seek .
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is an important contribution to the nonproliferation regime . Since Implementation Day in January 2016 , the UK has worked
with our partners in the Joint Commission to ensure the deal's success and we
expect all parties to continue to impl~ment the deal in full. The UK has a clear
position on the JCPOA: we regard it as a crucial agreement that makes the world a
safer place by neutralising the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran; The deal is working, as
demonstrated by successive IAEA reports. Iran's nuclear activities must be
peaceful. It is imperative that Iran continues to comply with its obligations under the
JCPOA , including allowing full International Atomic Energy Agency access. We also
call on Iran to refrain from ballistic missile launches that are inconsistent with UN
Security Council Resolution 2231 and from destabilising regional activities , including
the proliferation of mJssile technology.
The UK assigns the utmost importance to preventing the proliferation of missiles and
related technology . Such proliferation is a grave danger to regional and international
peace and security. The UK strongly supports the work of the MTCR , the Hague
Code of Conduct as the only multilateral transparency and confidence-building
instrument against ballistic missile proliferation , and other arms control and nonproliferation regimes . [We encourage other states to work towards, or complete the
process for , becoming members of or full adherents to the MTCR, and to subscribe
to the HagEle Code of Conduct.]
The UK is also actively engaged in the Proliferation Security Initiative, a multilateral
response to the challenges posed by WMD proliferation , working through coordinated
efforts to stop this proliferation trade .

2

We are committed to improving the security of nuclear and other radioactive material.
We continue to meet our commitments in this area, including those made at the 2016
Nuclear Security Summit in Washington. These included undertaking the largest single
movement of Highly Enriched Uranium to the United States; leading international
efforts to strengthen the cyber security of nuclear plants; and investing over £1 Omillion
to improve nuclear security worldwide. We continue to support the central role of the
IAEA in strengthening the nuclear security framework globally, which underpins the
[sustainability of] peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear technology, and
ensuring the Agency is adequately resourced.

Mr. Chairman,

The UK is fully supportive of the IAEA's role and its efforts to improve the effectiveness
of safeguards implementation through the State Level Concept. We believe that a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement plus an Additional Protocol should be the
universal verification standard.

We welcome that the vast majority of countries in the world have a Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA. [We also note that 148 countries have now
signed an Additional Protocol and 132 have brought it into force, a demonstration of
its widespread acceptance. We call on all States that have not yet done so to sign and
bring into force the Additional Protocol as soon as possible.]

Foliowing the UK's decision to leave the European Union and Euratom, we have
begun putting in place arrangements to set up a domestic safeguards regime to
enable us to meet the UK's international safeguards, and nuclear non-proliferation,
obligations.

The UK has begun formal negotiations with the IAEA on future voluntary agreements
for the application of civil nuclear safeguards in the UK. The new domestic
safeguards regime will be robust and as comprehensive as that currently provided .

We deplore Syria's ongoing non-compliance with its nuclear safeguards obligations .
We strongly urge Syria to cooperate fully with the IAEA by immediately providing
3

access to the information, documentation, sites, material and personnel in Syria that
the IAEA has requested.

[The UK is a strong supporter of the evolution of safeguards implementation according
to the State Level Concept. The SLC will enable the IAEA to focus its efforts on areas
of greatest safeguards significance. It will also result in less predictable safeguards,
increasing its deterrence value.]

We underscore our firm support for the continued evolution of the safeguards system
which faces considerable challenges in the years ahead as the demand for nuclear
power and nuclear technologies increases. Member States of the IAEA will have to
work together and with the Secretariat work to ensure the system has sufficient
resources, enough well-qualified inspectors in the field and IT systems to support
them, and has the political support to underpin continued improvements in the
implementation of IAEA safeguards. The UK will play a full part in those deliberations. ·

In addition, we provide support in many forms, including through the UK Safeguards
Support Programme which , provides training for IAEA inspectors, analysis of
environmental samples and the provision of non-English open .sources of information
that could reveal indications of undeclared nuclear activities .

We also provide

consultants, including assistance aimed at the resolution of non-compliance.

[The UK believes that changes to the Small Quantities Protocols (SQP) can remove a
potential loophole in safeguards implementation in States without a nuclear facility and
without an Additional Protocol. This is because the amended SQP requires a
declaration of any nuclear material held by the State, which the IAEA can then verify,
and the early provision of design information should the State decide to construct a
nuclear facility .]

The UK implements effective strategic export controls with respect to its nuclear
transfers, in line with the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee control
lists; and by fulfilling its obligations, the UK contributes to minimizing nuclear
proliferation while ensuring that State Parties of the NPT are able to access nuclear
technology for peaceful uses. We consider current export control procedures to be
4

robust and proportionate, and are committed to the responsible transfer of nuclear
items in line with our international obligations.

Mr Chairman

The United Kingdom supports the principle of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, which
contribute significantly to bolstering the non-proliferation regime and enhancing
regional and international security. [By ratifying protocols to treaties on nuclear
weapon free zones, the UK has given assurances to around 100 countries covedng
much of the globe including regions as diverse as Africa, Latin America and the
Pacific.] We remain committed to signing the outstanding Protocol for the South East
Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone.

The UK reiterates its full support for a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We will be making a
separate statement on this issue.

Thank you, Mr Chairman .

5


Mr Chairman,

The United Kingdom would like to reaffirm our commitment to the 1995 Resolution
on the Middle East, which was co-sponsored by the UK, US and Russia and to the
establishment of a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear and all other weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems.
We fully recognise our responsibilities under the goals of the 1995 Resolution on the
Middle East, and remain prepared to actively support and facilitate renewed regional
dialogue with and among all states of the region on arrangements for a conference.
We have previously sponsored a workshop in the UK at Wilton Park in December
2015 on the topic, to which we invited states from the region and other interested
parties. In 2016, we instigated and delivered a joint statement by the Co-Conveners
at First Committee in New York. And, having reached out on behalf of the coconvenors, we met with the Arab League Wise Person Panel in January 2017 .
We have the opportunity now to build on this and the United Kingdom will continue to
engage with all states in the region to explore how a fresh start could be made to the
process. At the same time, our efforts alone are not sufficient to achieve meaningful
progress toward the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. We encourage all States of the
Region to offer concrete ideas on how to move forward to engage in a structured
dialogue that is inclusive, balanced, consensus-based, and results oriented, with a
view to overcoming the current differences on the way towards the establishment in

Check against delivery

the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction.
We remain convinced that the convening of an initial conference, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at by all states in the region, as set out in the 2010 NPT
Review Conference Action Plan, is a worthwhile, valid, and achievable goal.
Thank you, Mr Chairman

Check against delivery
