	  
UNITED	  KINGDOM	  
STATEMENT	  BY	  AMBASSADOR	  JO	  ADAMSON	  TO	  THE	  FIRST	  PREPARATORY	  COMMITTEE	  FOR	  THE	  
NINTH	  REVIEW	  CONFERENCE	  OF	  THE	  TREATY	  ON	  THE	  NON-­‐PROLIFERATION	  OF	  NUCLEAR	  
WEAPONS:	  GENEVA:	  22	  April	  –	  3	  May	  
CLUSTER	  II	  –	  NON-­‐PROLIFERATION	  
Mr	  Chairman,	  
1. [Introduction]	  
2. As	  we	  said	  in	  our	  general	  statement,	  the	  UK	  wants	  to	  uphold	  and	  strengthen	  the	  NPT	  across	  
its	  3	  pillars	  during	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  Review	  Cycle.	  	  The	  2010	  Action	  Plan	  remains	  essential	  for	  
that	  task.	  
3. It	  is	  vital	  that	  the	  NPT	  remains	  fit	  for	  purpose	  in	  a	  world	  where	  we	  continue	  to	  face	  threats	  
to	  international	  peace	  and	  security.	  We	  are	  committed	  to	  strengthening	  non-­‐proliferation	  
architecture,	  to	  build	  trust	  between	  neighbours,	  and	  to	  combat	  programmes	  of	  concern	  –	  
safeguarding	  the	  security	  of	  NPT	  states	  parties.	  	  The	  United	  Kingdom	  continues	  to	  support	  
UNSCR	  1540	  and	  stands	  ready	  to	  assist	  states	  in	  its	  implementation.	  
4. The	  UK	  is	  supports	  a	  universal,	  strengthened	  safeguards	  system	  and	  the	  evolution	  of	  
safeguards	  implementation	  to	  a	  State	  level	  concept.	  
5. The	  IAEA’s	  Additional	  Protocol	  (AP)	  should	  be	  the	  universal	  verification	  norm.	  	  We	  are	  
pleased	  to	  see	  clear	  progress	  since	  the	  last	  PrepCom.	  	  We	  applaud	  ratification	  of	  the	  AP	  by	  
Iraq,	  Moldova,	  Namibia,	  Togo	  and	  Vietnam,	  as	  well	  as	  Burma’s	  announced	  decision	  to	  sign	  
the	  Additional	  Protocol,	  and	  call	  on	  all	  States	  which	  have	  not	  yet	  done	  so	  to	  ratify	  the	  
Additional	  Protocol	  as	  soon	  as	  possible.The	  UK	  stands	  ready	  to	  offer	  assistance.	  
6. The	  increasingly	  urgent	  international	  concerns	  about	  Iran’s	  nuclear	  programme	  highlight	  the	  
vital	  importance	  of	  the	  NPT.	  The	  UK	  remains	  deeply	  concerned	  about	  Iran’s	  continuing	  
nuclear	  activities	  in	  violation	  of	  multiple	  UN	  Security	  Council	  and	  IAEA	  Board	  of	  Governors	  
resolutions.	  Despite	  intensive	  IAEA	  efforts,	  Iran	  has	  still	  failed	  to	  engage	  with	  the	  Agency	  on	  
matters	  of	  substance.	  We	  urge	  Iran	  to	  cooperate	  substantively	  with	  the	  IAEA	  to	  resolve	  
outstanding	  issues	  regarding	  the	  “Possible	  Military	  Dimensions”	  of	  its	  nuclear	  programme,	  
and	  we	  support	  the	  central	  role	  of	  the	  IAEA	  in	  this	  regard.	  We	  urge	  Iran	  to	  constructively	  
engage	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  the	  confidence-­‐building	  proposal	  presented	  by	  the	  E3+3	  and	  to	  take	  
the	  concrete	  steps	  that	  would	  pave	  the	  way	  for	  comprehensive	  negotiation	  and	  restore	  
international	  confidence.	  
7. The	  UK	  condemns	  in	  the	  strongest	  possible	  terms	  the	  continued	  development	  of	  nuclear	  
weapons	  and	  ballistic	  missile	  programme	  by	  the	  DPRK	  in	  direct	  violation	  of	  UN	  Security	  
Council	  Resolutions.	  	  The	  DPRK’s	  recent	  nuclear	  test,	  satellite	  launches,	  and	  announcement	  
that	  they	  intend	  to	  reopen	  its	  Yongbyon	  nuclear	  facility	  has	  seriously	  undermined	  regional	  
stability.	  	  We	  urge	  the	  DPRK	  to	  return	  to	  the	  Six-­‐Party	  Talks;	  to	  abandon	  all	  nuclear	  weapons	  

Check	  against	  delivery	  

1	  

	  
and	  existing	  nuclear	  and	  ballistic	  missile	  programmes	  in	  a	  complete,	  verifiable	  and	  
irreversible	  manner;	  and	  to	  refrain	  from	  any	  further	  provocative	  acts.	  
8. The	  case	  of	  the	  DPRK	  highlights	  the	  urgent	  need	  to	  tackle	  withdrawal	  from	  the	  NPT.	  The	  
United	  Kingdom	  continues	  to	  support	  the	  right	  of	  every	  state	  party	  to	  withdraw,	  but	  urges	  
states	  parties	  to	  consider	  the	  ramifications	  of	  a	  withdrawal	  on	  individual	  and	  collective	  
security,	  including	  cases	  in	  which	  a	  state	  has	  breached	  its	  Treaty	  obligations,	  yet	  continues	  
after	  withdrawal,	  to	  benefit	  from	  technology	  acquired	  while	  an	  NPT	  state	  party.	  In	  this	  
respect,	  we	  urgently	  need	  to	  address	  non-­‐compliance	  with	  the	  NPT.	  The	  UK	  supports	  the	  
central	  role	  of	  the	  IAEA	  in	  verifying	  compliance.	  	  	  
9. As	  called	  on	  in	  UNSCR	  1887,	  the	  United	  Kingdom	  continues	  to	  urge	  the	  non-­‐NPT	  states	  to	  
ratify	  the	  NPT	  as	  non-­‐nuclear	  weapon	  states.	  In	  pursuit	  of	  this	  aim,	  we	  are	  working	  to	  bring	  
these	  states	  closer	  to	  the	  international	  non-­‐proliferation	  mainstream.	  
10. Mr	  Chairman,	  
11. The	  United	  Kingdom	  supports	  the	  principle	  of	  Nuclear	  Weapon	  Free	  Zones,	  which	  enhance	  
regional	  and	  international	  security.	  	  
12. The	  UK	  will	  speak	  in	  further	  detail	  about	  the	  Middle	  East	  Weapons	  of	  Mass	  Destruction	  Free	  
Zone	  in	  the	  specific	  issue	  session.	  	  But	  allow	  me	  to	  reiterate	  my	  government’s	  commitment	  
to	  the	  objective	  of	  a	  Middle	  East	  Zone.	  	  We	  regretted	  the	  postponement	  in	  2012	  and	  
support	  the	  convening	  of	  a	  conference	  as	  soon	  as	  possible	  in	  2013.	  We	  fully	  endorse	  the	  
work	  of	  the	  Conference	  Facilitator,	  Finnish	  Under-­‐Secretary	  of	  State	  Jaakko	  Laajava,	  to	  build	  
consensus	  on	  next	  steps.	  	  
13. We	  remain	  fully	  committed	  to	  the	  P5	  Protocol	  to	  the	  South	  East	  Asian	  Nuclear	  Weapons	  
Free	  Zone,	  we	  want	  to	  resolve	  the	  outstanding	  issues	  and	  sign	  the	  Protocol	  as	  soon	  as	  
possible.	  	  We	  are	  currently	  working	  with	  C5	  and	  P5	  partners	  to	  make	  progress	  on	  the	  Central	  
Asia	  Nuclear	  Weapon	  Free	  Zone.	  And	  of	  course,	  we	  support	  the	  parallel	  declarations	  
adopted	  by	  the	  P5	  and	  Mongolia,	  concerning	  Mongolia’s	  nuclear	  weapon	  free	  status,	  at	  the	  
United	  Nations	  on	  17	  September	  2012.	  
	  
Thank	  you,	  Mr	  Chairman.	  	  

Check	  against	  delivery	  

2	  

