2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Pillar N
Statement by the United Kingdom
Mr Chairman,
I must first point out that the UK will hold a General Election on 8 June. Candidates

in that election have a range of views. The statement I am about to make sets out
the long-standing British view on non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, the United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the European Union. I would also like to add some
further remarks in a national capacity.
It is of course vital that the NPT remains fit for purpose in a world where we continue
to face threats to international peace and security. The United Kingdom is committed
to strengthening non-proliferation architecture, combating programmes of concern
and building trust between neighbours, and we continue to work actively to reduce
the risk of non-proliferation.

The UK has consistently been at the forefront of

international efforts to tackle proliferation. We devote substantial efforts to this.
Mr Chairman
The UK condemns in the strongest possible terms the DPRK’s continued
development of its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes in direct
violation of UNSCRs 1718, 1874, 2087, 2270 and 2321. The UK has worked closely
with UNSC partners throughout the development and adoption of these UNSCRs.
1

This robust engagement clearly demonstrates that the UK is prepared to support
significant measures in response to the DPRK’s illegal programs. We deplore all the
DPRK’s ongoing nuclear weapons activities and urge the DPRK to refrain from any
actions that may violate UNSCRs, posing a threat to regional peace and stability. We
echo the call for the DPRK to fulfil its commitments under the 19 September 2005
Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks, and to abandon all nuclear weapons and
existing programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, We hope to
see progress being made during the next review cycle.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an important contribution to the
non-proliferation regime. Since Implementation Day JCPOA on 16 January 2016, the
UK has worked with our partners in the Joint Commission to ensure the deal’s
success. We welcome the latest report from the IAEA confirming Iran is in
compliance with its nuclear-related commitments.

The UK remains absolutely

committed to rigorous implementation of the JCPOA.
The prevention of the proliferation of ballistic missiles is of the utmost importance to
the UK. Such proliferation in tandem with the illicit development of WMD poses a
grave danger to regional and global peace and security. In this regard the work of
the MTCR, which this year celebrates its 3011 anniversary, and other arms control
and non proliferation regimes is key and we encourage other states to work towards,
or complete the process of, becoming state parties to the MTCR.
The UK is also actively engaged in the Proliferation Security Initiative, a multilateral
response to the challenges that are posed by the proliferation of WMD, working
through coordinated efforts to stop this proliferation trade. Last year the UK hosted
the PSI’s operational experts meeting that serves as a forum to discuss and develop
concepts to further the initiative.
We are also committed to improving the security of nuclear and other radioactive
material. At the fourth Nuclear Security Summit in Washington last year, we
announced strong new commitments, including undertaking the largest single
movement of Highly Enriched Uranium to the United States; to lead international
efforts to strengthen the cyber security of nuclear plants; and a further investment of
2

over £10 million to improve nuclear security worldwide. Following the culmination of
the Nuclear Security Summit process we continue to support the central role of the
IAEA in strengthening the nuclear security framework globally and ensuring it has
adequate resources to do so.
Mr. Chairman,
The United Kingdom is fully supportive of the role of the IAEA and its efforts to
improve the effectiveness of safeguards implementation through the State Level
Concept. We believe that a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement plus an
Additional Protocol should be the universal verification standard.
The UK welcomes the fact that the vast majority of countries in the world have a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We also note the fact that 146 countries have now signed an Additional
Protocol and 129 have brought it into force, a demonstration of its widespread
acceptance. We call on all States which have not yet done so to sign and bring into
force the Additional Protocol as soon as possible.
We deplore Syria’s ongoing non-compliance with its nuclear safeguards obligations.
We strongly urge Syria to cooperate fully with the IAEA by immediately providing
access to the information, documentation, sites, material and personnel in Syria that
the IAEA has requested.
The UK is also a strong supporter of the evolution of safeguards implementation to
the State Level Concept (SLC). The SLC will enable the IAEA to focus its efforts on
areas of greatest safeguards significance.

It will also result in less predictable

safeguards, increasing its deterrence value.
We also underscore our firm support for the continued evolution of the safeguards
system.

Our support takes many forms, including through the UK Safeguards

Support Programme which, inter alia, provides training for IAEA inspectors, analysis
of environmental samples and the provision of non-English open sources of

3

information that could reveal indications of undeclared nuclear activities. We also
provide consultants, including assistance aimed at the resolution of non-compliance.
In addition, the UK believes that changes to the Small Quantities Protocols (SQP)
are

important

because

they

remove

a

potential

loophole

in

safeguards

implementation in States without a nuclear facility and without an Additional Protocol.
This is because the amended SQP requires a declaration of any nuclear material
held by the State, which the IAEA can then verify, and the early provision of design
information should the State decide to construct a nuclear facility.
The UK implements effective strategic export controls in regards to its nuclear
transfers in line with the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee
control lists; and by fulfilling its obligations, the UK contributes to minimizing nuclear
proliferation while ensuring that State Parties of the NPT are able to access nuclear
technology for peaceful uses. We consider current export control procedures to be
robust and proportionate, and are committed to the responsible transfer of nuclear
items (equipment, technology and materials) in line with our international obligations.
Mr Chairman
The United Kingdom supports the principle of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, which
contribute significantly to bolstering the non-proliferation regime and enhancing
regional and international security.

By ratifying protocols to treaties on nuclear

weapon free zones, the UK has given assurances to around 100 countries covering
much of the globe including regions as diverse as Africa, Latin America and the
Pacific. We remain committed to signing the outstanding Protocol for the South East
Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone.
The UK reiterates its support for a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We will be making a
separate statement on this issue.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

4

