THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND

CLUSTER 2 ISSUES STATEMENT
to the

THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS
By

Dr. Matthew Rowland
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the
Conference on Disarmament
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations in Geneva

New York, 1 May 2014
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr. Chairman,

1. At the outset, the United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the European Union. I would also like to add some
further remarks in a national capacity.

2. It is of course vital that the NPT remains fit for purpose in a world where we continue
to face threats to international peace and security. The United Kingdom is committed
to strengthening non-proliferation architecture, combating programmes of concern
and building trust between neighbours, and we will continue to work actively to
reduce the risk of non-proliferation.

Mr. Chairman,
3. The United Kingdom remains fully committed to a diplomatic solution that resolves
the international community’s concerns regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. We
welcome the Joint Plan of Action agreed between the E3+3 and Iran that took effect
on 20 January 2014. However, further significant progress is needed in order to
agree a long-term, comprehensive solution that fully reassures the international
community of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We also
welcome the Framework for Cooperation agreed between the IAEA and Iran in
November 2013, and call on Iran to cooperate substantively with the IAEA to resolve
all outstanding questions, particularly those related to possible military dimensions.

4. The United Kingdom condemns in the strongest possible terms the DPRK’s
continued development of its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes in
direct violation of UNSCRs 1718, 1874, 2087 and 2094. We deplore all the DPRK’s
ongoing nuclear activities and urge the DPRK to refrain from any actions that may
lead to further violations of UNSCRs and further destabilise the region. We echo the
call for the DPRK to fulfil its commitments under the 19 September 2005 Joint

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Statement of the Six-Party Talks, and to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.

5. The United Kingdom will speak in detail about the Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the specific issue session
tomorrow. However, I would like to note our commitment to the objective of a Middle
East Zone, and our ongoing efforts to convene a Conference, based on
arrangements agreed by the states of the region, as soon as possible.

Mr. Chairman,
6. As called on in UNSCR 1887, the United Kingdom continues to urge non-NPT states
to ratify the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states. We will continue to work to bring
those states closer to the international non-proliferation mainstream, including
through regular non-proliferation dialogues.

7. The United Kingdom continues to support UNSCR 1540. In December 2013, we
submitted our Fourth Implementation Plan and first National Action Plan to the UN
1540 Committee. Under our 2013 Presidency of the Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, we also hosted an outreach
event to non-reporting states, with two 1540 Committee Experts in London, and
have funded UNODA to deliver two workshops in Senegal and Kenya. UNSCR
1540 continues to be as relevant now in its tenth anniversary year as ever. We
believe that states parties should actively consider what more we can do to
implement UNSCR 1540, including within the context of the NPT, and the United
Kingdom stands ready to assist states in its implementation.

8. We support wider efforts on nuclear security, and welcome the outcomes from the
recent Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague. At the Summit, we pledged to host
an IAEA International Physical Protection Advisory Service Mission in 2015-16; to
contribute £3.4 million to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund in 2014; and to continue

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

our Global Threat Reduction Programme of financial and expert assistance for
nuclear and radiological security improvements overseas. We also presented out
multinational gift basket in nuclear information security to the Nuclear Security
Summit which attracted 35 signatories. We applaud the efforts of the Dutch
Government in hosting the Summit.

Mr. Chairman,
9. The United Kingdom is strongly committed to an effective and efficient safeguards
regime. We believe that a comprehensive safeguards agreement plus an Additional
Protocol should be the universal verification norm, and are pleased to see further
progress since the last PrepCom. We welcome entry into force of Additional
Protocols for Antigua & Barbuda, Bosnia & Herzegovina and Vanuatu, signature of
an Additional Protocol by Burma and Guinea-Bissau and the Board of Governor’s
approval of an Additional Protocol for Laos and St Kitts and Nevis. We call on all
States which have not yet done so to sign and bring into force the Additional
Protocol as soon as possible.

10. Finally, the United Kingdom fully supports and encourages the IAEA in its efforts to
implement safeguards based on the State Level Concept. We believe the State
Level Concept makes greater use of the IAEA’s ability to consider the State as a
whole, and uses objective State factors to draw up a State-level Safeguards
Approach for a State. This makes best use of limited resources whilst strengthening
effectiveness. We are also pleased to have been able to provide 400,000 Euros this
year towards the new Nuclear Materials Laboratory of the IAEA’s Safeguards
Analytical Laboratory, bringing the total United Kingdom contribution to 1.4 million
Euros.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

