Statement
by the Delegation of Ukraine to the 2 nd session of PrepCom for the 2015
NPT Review Conference
Cluster 2 Non-proliferation, Safeguards, Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
Dear Mr.Chairman,
Distinguished participants of the meeting
Ukraine proceeds from the understanding that proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, together with international terrorism remain
to be the pre-eminent threat to international peace and security.
Today’s risks and challenges are much more diverse and multifaceted than
decades ago since they include not only the major risk of a nuclear war being
unleashed between competing nuclear powers, but also quite a real possibility for
non-state actors to use WMD or respective materials as a weapon of terror.
In these circumstances willing to contribute to the global non-proliferation
efforts Ukraine remains committed to the preservation of the integrity of the NPT and
strengthening its implementation.
Full universalisation of the NPT remains to be an urgent priority for Ukraine.
Ukraine recognizes that IAEA safeguards are a fundamental element of the
nuclear non-proliferation regime. My country strongly supports the IAEA efforts
aimed at further strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of its
safeguard system. This includes implementation of integrated safeguards for states
having both the comprehensive safeguards agreement and additional protocol in
force.
In this regard I would like to underline that in 2011 the Secretariat of the IAEA
came to conclusion that all nuclear materials located in Ukraine pursue exclusively
peaceful purposes and thus the Agency granted to our state Broad Conclusions. Since
2012 this conclusion enables the IAEA to apply integrated safeguards in Ukraine that
represents the high level of trust and cooperation between Ukraine and IAEA in
exercising Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol.
Ukraine struggles to improve national nuclear export control policies by
supporting and, where possible, seeking to strengthen the guidelines of the Zangger
Committee and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, including the latter’s controls on dualuse items, in order to adapt them to the new non-proliferation challenges. We use
multilaterally negotiated and adopted guidelines in elaborating national approaches
towards export controls.

2
Following NPT provisions as well as obligations outlined in the decisions of
Washington and Seoul nuclear summits Ukrainian authorities ensure that national
nuclear-related exports do not assist the development of nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices.
Ukraine is devoted to work towards adoption during the 2015 Review
Conference of the document on procedures for and consequences of possible exercise
of the right to withdrawal by a State Party from the NPT.
We strongly support the early entry-into-force of the 1996 Comprehensive
Nuclear Test-Ban-Treaty. We welcome efforts of the Preparatory Commission for the
CTBT Organization to establish an effective verification regime, including the
international monitoring system and development of the on-site inspections regime.
Ukraine continues to support the early commencement of international
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament within a balanced work programme
on a Treaty banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices (FMCT). We call upon all States concerned to
declare and uphold a moratorium on the production of such material;
The delegation of Ukraine underlines the importance of the establishment of
zones free of all weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, where they
do not exist, especially in regions of tension such as in the Middle East. We are upset
that international community have not managed to hold in 2012 a conference on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons
of mass destruction.Therefore, we call upon all parties concerned to consider to take
practical and urgent steps required for full implementation of the 1995 decision to
establish an effectively verifiable nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East.
Ukraine is a strong adherent of different international initiatives which
contribute nuclear non-proliferation regimes. That is why we welcome cooperation
between the states in the framework of Proliferation Security Initiative.
Ukraine also believes that implementation of the G8 Initiative “Global
Partnership against Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction” would
further enhance international peace and security. Being the recipient State Ukraine
attaches great importance to realization of projects aimed at strengthening national
capabilities to resist today’s threats and challenges in the area of nuclear smuggling
and non-proliferation.
Ukraine is a consistent supporter of the UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
We have presented to the UN Secretariat national report on the implementation of the
Resolution in March 2011.
Today I am happy to announce our readiness to host by the end of this year the
international seminar on the 1540 issues. The event will be organized with the UN
and OSCE assistance.

3
Dear participants of the meeting,
It is our strong conviction, that the Non-Proliferation Treaty is vital in
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and in providing significant security
benefits. We believe that this session of the Preparatory Committee will reaffirm the
fundamental importance of full compliance with all provisions of the NPT
Thank you for the attention.

