Check against delivery

STATEMENT
by H.E. Ambassador Yurii KLYMENKO,
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations Office and other
International Organizations in Geneva
Cluster 2 issues
(April 30, 2018, Geneva)
Mr Chairman,

While aligning with the statement of the European Union delivered on
Friday, I would like to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
Mr Chairman,

Ukraine highly values the important role, which the IAEA plays in
coordinating international efforts in securing nuclear non-proliferation regime and
facilitating the peaceful use of nuclear energy worldwide.
We support the IAEA efforts aimed at strengthening the effectiveness and
improving the efficiency of its safeguards system. We welcome the progress made
in the area of development of safeguards implementation at the state level, which
will enable the Agency to address new demands and challenges related to the
nuclear technologies.
It is our strong conviction that Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements
together with Additional Protocol represent the verification standard that best
fulfils the objectives of the Article III of the Treaty.
Against this backdrop, Ukraine recognizes irrefutable authority and
independent role of the Agency in applying safeguards and drawing relevant
conclusions in accordance with its Statute, the NPT, nuclear-weapon-free zone

treaties and Agency's bilateral and multilateral safeguards agreements.
Mr Chairman,

We highly appreciate the IAEA principled pos1llon on continuation of
safeguards application to nuclear facilities and materials in Ukraine in accordance
with the norms of international law and the IAEA Statute.
Ukraine retains jurisdiction over all nuclear facilities and materials,
including the research reactor IR-100 and other nuclear facilities of the Sevastopol
National University of Nuclear Energy and Industry, which are the property of
Ukraine and presently are located on the temporarily occupied territory. Provisions
of the Agreement between Ukraine and the IAEA for the Application of
Safeguards in connection with the NPT remain fully effective and apply to all
nuclear facilities and materials in Ukraine, including those located on the
temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol.
We strongly object to any steps, including within the framework of the
IAEA, which are taken to legitimize temporary occupation of the part of the
sovereign Ukrainianterritoryof Crimea.

Let me underline that, pursuant to the Agreement between Ukraine and the
IAEA for the Application of Safeguards iu connection with the NPT, on the whole
territory of Ukraine it is prohibited to deploy nnclea,· weapons or divert nuclear
materials and facilities of Ukraine for military purposes.
Therefore, Ukraine calls upon the international community to urge Russia to
abstain from any actions connected with the violation of the nuclear-free status of
the part of the territory of Ukraine - the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol.
J\,lrChairman,
Another serious challenge for the international nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation process remains the nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of

the DPRK.
Taking into consideration the latest declarations of Pyongyang, we expect
this country to start as soon as possible fulfilling relevant UN SC Resolutions, to
abandon all its existing nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, to renew its
dialogue with the IAEA and re-engage constructively with the international
community by taking meaningful steps towards denuclearization in order to work
together towards lasting peace and security on a nuclear-free Korean peninsula.
Mr Chairman,
Ukraine underscores the crucial role of export controls in implementing the
nuclear non-proliferation obligations nnder paragraph 2 of Article III of the NPT.
We encourage all states to establish, develop and maintain appropriate effective
national export controls for nuclear and related dual-use goods and technology. We
stand ready to share our national practice in the area of export control with other
states.
Recognizing the serious threat of nuclear terrorism, we reaffinn our
commitment to work together with the international community to strengthen

nuclearsecurity.
The necessity to immediately strengthen and adapt the regime of physical
protection of nuclear facilities and material in Llcraine is primarily related to the
threats emanating from ongoing outside aggression.
In this context, Ukraine is taking all necessary measures to ensure the
highest level of physical protection of nuclear facilities and material, fully
perfonns its inten1ational obligations in the area of nuclear safety and security, and
comprehensively participates in the implementation of the activities, envisaged by
the IA.EA Nuclear Security Plan.
Finally, Mr Chairnrnn, let me assure you that Ukraine will remain actively
engaged in the global process of non-proliferation and disarmament, consistently
supporting effective multilateral efforts aimed at preventing and combating
proliferation of weapons and materials of mass destruction.
I thank you.

