
The United Kingdom fully supports the statement made by Slovenia on behalf of the European Union on the issues of relevance to Cluster II. We would like to add a few additional remarks on matters of particular importance to the United Kingdom.
Mr Chairman
In our statement to this session last year we commended the example set by Libya, which in 2003 renounced its clandestine programme to develop nuclear weapons and began to dismantle and destroy associated facilities and equipment. At the start of the previous decade the newly democratic South Africa disposed of the nuclear weapon capacity it had inherited from the previous government and signed the NPT as a non-nuclear weapons state. The actions of both these countries did great service to the cause of international peace and security. The United Kingdom salutes them.
As we said in our opening remarks at this meeting, nuclear proliferation undermines not only the NPT but also collective security. It brings back the spectre of a nuclear arms race and de-stabilises the region concerned and beyond. The United Nations Security Council has voiced that concern on behalf of the international community in respect of two countries whose nuclear activities have cast a long shadow.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea exploded a nuclear device on 9 October 2006. In Resolution 1718 the UN Security Council expressed its gravest concern at the test explosion and deplored the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's announcement of withdrawal from the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The United Kingdom strongly supports the Joint Statement of 19 September 2005, the goal of which is the verifiable and peaceful de-nuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula. We fully support the Six Party Talks process and urge the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to meet its commitments under the 3 October Agreement.
The United Kingdom believes the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to be bound by its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and calls on its Government to comply with them and with United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1695 and 1718.
Mr Chairman
On Friday the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, and the Vice-Foreign Minister of China - the so-called E3+3 or 5+1 Group - met in London to talk about the next steps in their approach to what they called the "grave problem" posed by Iran's nuclear programme. They made clear that the six countries are united in a shared belief that that threat posed to stability by Iran's enrichment programme is very serious and that it is one that they want to address directly.
The United Kingdom and its partners remain united in their determination to pursue a twin-track strategy. In March the Security Council agreed Resolution 1803, sending a message to the Government and people of Iran. It was the third time the UN has sent a strong message of international resolve to Iran by adopting a sanctions resolution
under Article 41 of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. It made clear the collective concern of United Nations member states that Iran might be intending to use its nuclear programme for military purposes. The United Kingdom said at the time that it did not have confidence that Iran's programme was for exclusively peaceful purposes. And it remains our judgement that Iran's nuclear programme only makes sense as part of a plan to develop, at the least, a nuclear weapons capability.
But the United Kingdom and its partners have always been clear that action in the United Nations Security Council should be accompanied by an offer to Iran showing the benefits of engagement and co-operation with the international community. At their meeting the Ministers reviewed and update the offer that they made to Iran in June 2006 and agreed a proposal to be put to the Government of Iran. The details of that offer will only by revealed to the Government of Iran. We very much hope that the Iranian Government will recognise the seriousness and sincerity with which China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States of America have approached this issue and that it will respond in a timely manner to the suggestions that have been made.
Iran says that it wants to play a constructive role. Its task is to re-build confidence in its nuclear intentions. The United Kingdom strongly supports Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. It recognises Iran's right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with its NPT obligations. We believe that the rights that it seeks need to be accompanied by a clear set of responsibilities. It is in the spirit of seeking to fulfil both rights and responsibilities that we have made the new approach to Iran.
Mr Chairman
Events in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Iraq in the first half of the 1990s showed the IAEA safeguards regime required strengthening. The United Kingdom believes the safeguards regime should be continuously reviewed to ensure it is fit for purpose. The Agency must have access to, and make effective use of, the resources and tools necessary to ensure that the safeguards agreements are robustly verified. An effective and efficient safeguards system, properly policed, is an essential element of the international non-proliferation architecture.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the argument that a comprehensive safeguards agreement together with the additional protocol represent today's verification standard. We believe the universal adoption of integrated safeguards, particularly in states with significant nuclear activities, would make a major contribution to strengthening the IAEA's safeguards regime and international confidence and transparency. The conclusion of an additional protocol considerably enhances the effectiveness of the safeguards system. It enables the IAEA to verify that all nuclear material in a state is in peaceful use and enables the proper implementation of integrated safeguards.
The briefing given to members of the United States Senate and House of Representatives Intelligence Committees on 24 April 2008 and the release of video footage that appears to support the assessment that Syria was building a nuclear site in co-operation with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea further demonstrate the
importance of the Additional Protocol and why the International Atomic Energy Agency has repeatedly requested all its member countries to adopt it. United Kingdom officials have found the evidence presented to be convincing. We therefore welcome the agreement of the IAEA to assess the evidence and to provide an objective judgement on whether what the report purports to show is correct.
The United Kingdom is firmly of the opinion that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's announcement of its intention to withdraw from the NPT revealed a serious weakness that we need to address. The United Kingdom believes the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's self-proclaimed exit from the Treaty to be invalid and that it remains bound by its NPT obligations. We are aware that others accept that it is outside the NPT regime. We believe this highlights the need to clarify the consequences of withdrawal. The United Kingdom strongly supports the European Union paper on Article X of the Treaty, which it tabled last year to address this issue. We re-affirm our belief that, without in any way reopening the Treaty, we need to set out clear measures that make plain the extreme gravity of withdrawal and raise the cost for any State Party thinking of pulling out of the NPT.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the decision of the UN Security Council to reinforce and extend the mandate of its Committee on Non-Proliferation, the so-called 1540 Committee, in United Nations Security Council Resolution 1810. We particularly commend the increased focus on dialogue, outreach and practical assistance with implementation and capacity building. The United Kingdom was a co-sponsor of UNSCR 1540, 1540 rightly set the bar high. The international community's armour against weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of terrorists and criminals is as strong as its weakest link. 1540 also recognised that some states would require assistance to achieve full implementation. The United Kingdom accepts this will require investment of time and resources. We call on those states that require assistance to implement their 1540 obligation to make their needs known and on those who can provide resources or relevant know-how, to assist. The United Kingdom will play its role in assisting implementation both bilaterally and through the European Union.
The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for the principle and practice of nuclear weapon-free zones and underlines its willingness to play an active and constructive role in their development. We have signed and ratified protocols to the Treaties, which cover Africa, the South Pacific and Latin America and the Caribbean.
The United Kingdom hopes that the nuclear weapons states and the Association of South East Asian Nations will be able to resume consultations in the framework of United Nations Development Commission's 1999 Guidelines to that the Protocol to the Treaty of Bangkok can be agreed and ratified. We remain disappointed that the Treaty on a Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia was signed on 8 September 2006 without conclusion of consultations over the text of the Treaty, and in the full knowledge that serious issues would preclude ratification of the Protocol by the United Kingdom. Despite our best efforts, since we last had consultations in 2002, it has not proved possible to persuade the Central Asian States to discuss this issue further. But the creation of a purported nuclear weapon-free zone that gives primacy to previous security arrangements, and does not live up to the vision of Article VII of the NPT in assuring total absence of nuclear weapons, left us with no option. We note
the recent report of ratification of the Treaty of Semipalatinsk by Turkmenistan and urge those States that have yet to ratify the Treaty to do so. We can then seek to resolve the outstanding differences.
Mr Chairman
The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction as set out in the Middle East Resolution at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference. We are committed to achieving the implementation of such a zone. We have consistently supported the First Committee of the UN General Assembly in calling for a nuclear weapon-free zone in the Middle East. We are committed to the universalisation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and call on the states that have not signed to do so as non-nuclear weapon states. We look forward to further discussion of this important issue in the session on 6 May.
