Mr. Chairman,
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is an enduring foundation for the common
security interests of all states. While the work of nonproliferation is incomplete
and imperfect, what we have achieved through the NPT, and in building the
broader nuclear nonproliferation regime, has made us immeasurably safer and
more secure. This success was not a foregone conclusion, and it is not something
we can afford to take for granted.
Sustaining and advancing the Treaty’s core nonproliferation goals requires our
collective determination to strengthen international safeguards, implement robust
export controls that keep pace with changes in technology, and respond resolutely
to proliferation challenges we continue to face, including in cases of
noncompliance. Those efforts directly benefit our shared security, enable the
peaceful use of nuclear technology, and help create the conditions for nuclear
disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is the foundation of the nuclear nonproliferation regime, and
international safeguards are one of its cornerstones. Article III of the Treaty
requires States Party to conclude safeguards agreements with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in order to ensure that nuclear materials and
activities remain in peaceful uses. However, the safeguards system has evolved
since the signing of the Treaty, in response to a number of challenges. These
include clandestine nuclear programs, illicit transfer of nuclear materials and fuel
cycle equipment and technology, and revolutionary leaps forward in technology.
The Additional Protocol (AP) requires states to provide expanded information
about, and access to, all nuclear-related activities in a state so that the IAEA can

provide assurances that there are no undeclared nuclear materials or activities in
that state. This is in line with the verification goal set out in Article III: to ensure
that safeguards are applied to all nuclear material, “with a view to preventing
diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons.”
As of today, 132 countries have an Additional Protocol in force. Sixteen others
have signed the AP. Given its widespread adoption, its intrinsic connection to the
purposes of the NPT, and lessons learned from past proliferation challenges, the
AP is the de facto standard for assuring compliance with the Treaty’s safeguards
obligations. Those who raise objections to the AP or who craft treaties that ignore
this essential standard are increasingly out of step with what it takes to achieve the
ultimate goals of the NPT, and undermine both the efficacy of the safeguards
system and the nonproliferation confidence needed to facilitate peaceful uses.
We commend Honduras, Senegal, and Thailand for bringing their Additional
Protocols into force, and Liberia and Algeria for signing theirs. For those NPT
Parties that have not yet concluded a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, we
urge them to do so as soon as possible, to conclude an Additional Protocol and,
where applicable, to adopt the modified version of the Small Quantities Protocol.
We also call on nuclear suppliers to do their part to advance the goals of the NPT.
It is high time for the AP to become a standard condition for nuclear cooperation,
and we call on those suppliers who have not yet done so to join us in making the
AP a requirement for nuclear exports. We look forward to the AP becoming a
multilateral standard for nuclear supply.
The United States understands that establishing the legal and regulatory
framework, technical expertise, and institutional procedures necessary to conclude
and implement safeguards agreements can sometimes place a significant strain on
States. This is particularly true for those with limited capacity and resources.
Fortunately, the IAEA provides assistance in this regard, including assessment and
advisory services, safeguards training and outreach, and publication of guidance
documents. The United States also conducts extensive training and outreach to
build capacity and enable States to meet their safeguards obligations. This
capacity building helps ensure that States interested in developing nuclear
technology for peaceful uses can do so in conformity with the highest
nonproliferation standards.
Ultimately, the cost of safeguards is modest compared to the enormous security
and economic benefits of the IAEA’s assurances regarding the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We call on all IAEA Member States to work together to ensure
2

that the IAEA has the resources and the political support it needs to carry out its
safeguards mission and to develop new tools to keep pace with advancing
technology and other proliferation challenges.
Mr. Chairman,
I urge everyone here to steer clear of the kind of zero-sum thinking that mistakenly
pits nonproliferation against the other objectives of the Treaty. This is not only
misguided but counterproductive. Withholding action on nonproliferation does
nothing to stimulate action on disarmament or cooperation on peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. To the contrary, nonproliferation creates the very conditions that
are essential for those endeavors to thrive – just as foot-dragging on
nonproliferation only makes these other benefits more difficult and elusive.
As we look to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime, building on a halfcentury of success in order to meet future challenges, we must do so with the
shared understanding that our efforts, if successful, will help create the conditions
necessary to achieve further progress towards nuclear disarmament and to expand
access to the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. We can only realize the safe and
secure world to which we all aspire if we work together, based on shared interests,
to preserve and advance the nonproliferation regime for future generations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

Mr. Chairman,
The United States welcomes the opportunity to discuss real-world proliferation challenges that
threaten our collective security.
Foremost among these is North Korea’s unlawful nuclear weapon and ballistic missile programs,
which pose a grave threat to international security and the global nonproliferation regime. Last
September, the DPRK conducted its sixth and largest nuclear test, which it claimed was an “Hbomb for an ICBM.” The DPRK claimed the test “marked a very significant occasion in
attaining the final goal of completing the state nuclear force.” Over the last two years, the DPRK
has increased the frequency and range of its ballistic missile tests, including three ICBM tests
and two missile launches over the territory of Japan.
We are encouraged by the recent summit meeting between the Republic of Korea and the DPRK,
and the stated goal of complete denuclearization, but past diplomatic initiatives with the DPRK
underscore the need for measured optimism and resolve. International efforts to pressure North
Korea, counter its illicit networks, and constrain its destabilizing activities must and will
continue. The global maximum pressure campaign must continue until the DPRK completely,
verifiably, and irreversibly abandons its nuclear weapons and existing nuclear and delivery
programs. This includes, at minimum, all countries fully implementing the spirit and letter of the
UN DPRK sanctions regime. The international community stands united in its desire to see a
denuclearized DPRK, and North Korea’s return to the NPT and IAEA safeguards.
Mr. Chairman,
Iran also poses a significant proliferation challenge. In October, President Trump announced the
Administration’s Iran strategy, which underscores the United States’ commitment to denying

-2Iran all paths to a nuclear weapon and holding Iran accountable for its destabilizing non-nuclear
activities, including its ballistic missile development and support for terrorism.
In January, the President approved the issuance of sanctions waivers in order for the
Administration to work with our European partners to address deficiencies in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), including its verification provisions, the sunset of key
nuclear commitments, and its failure to address long-range ballistic missiles. While we work to
address these issues, we are committed to strict implementation of Iran’s JCPOA commitments
and have continued to fulfill our own commitments. The President has made clear, however, that
the United States will withdraw from the JCPOA if these issues are not addressed.
Given Iran’s history of noncompliance and illicit pursuit of nuclear weapons, thorough IAEA
verification in Iran remains essential. Iran must strictly adhere to its IAEA safeguards
obligations, including timely and proactive cooperation with the IAEA, and the international
community must respond to any violations of its commitments. Any credible concerns of
undeclared nuclear activities can and must be pursued by the IAEA, which must use all of its
authorities to monitor Iran’s compliance.
Mr. Chairman,
Seven years have passed since the IAEA Board of Governors found Syria in noncompliance with
its safeguards agreement for constructing an undeclared plutonium production reactor with North
Korean assistance. Since that time, Syria has refused to cooperate with the IAEA’s
investigation. Syria’s ongoing noncompliance is a direct challenge to the Treaty and should be a
matter of concern for all Parties. We call on Syria to cooperate with the IAEA without delay.
Mr. Chairman,
The United States supports the long-term goal of a Middle East free of weapons of mass
destruction and delivery systems, alongside a comprehensive and durable regional peace. We
remain committed to supporting the regional states as they pursue practical steps and inclusive,
consensus-based dialogue to advance this important goal. We regret the political and security
realities that continue to impede progress, including the lack of trust in the region, rampant
conflict and noncompliance, the ongoing use of chemical weapons by Syria, ballistic missile
proliferation, and the non-recognition of Israel by some regional states.
We believe progress is possible, but only if pursued in a cooperative manner on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at by the regional states. The last two decades have illustrated that
the NPT review process is not a productive venue for resolving regional divisions on this issue.
Misguided attempts to coerce progress by holding the review process hostage will fail, as they

-3have in the past. Instead, we urge the regional states to engage their neighbors directly on
practical measures to build trust and promote conditions conducive to a zone. We have provided
U.S. views on potentially constructive avenues in this regard in a working paper.
We underline that the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East endorses the goal of a zone free of all
-weapons of mass destruction. It is difficult to imagine any genuine movement toward such a
zone without resolute steps to address Syria’s clandestine chemical weapons program. Any
serious supporter of such a zone should join us in resolving this problem immediately.
Mr. Chairman,
We remain concerned by the growth of nuclear stockpiles and capabilities in Asia by NPT and
non-NPT Parties, and continue to encourage all states with nuclear weapons to exercise restraint
regarding nuclear and missile capabilities. We welcome the steps that states have taken to
bolster global nonproliferation efforts, including by harmonizing with, adhering to, and joining
export control regimes and supporting efforts to prevent the acquisition and use of weapons of
mass destruction by non-state actors.
We continue to encourage all states that have not yet done so to declare and maintain moratoria
on the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons. The United States continues to
support the long-term goal of NPT universality, and we remain committed to efforts to
strengthen and uphold the Treaty.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

