Statement by ChargC d9AffairesRobert A. Wood
Acting U.S. Permanent Representative to the International Organizations in
Vienna, Austria
Department of State
United States of America

Cluster 2 Issues
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
May 7,2012

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I welcome the opportunity to address the Treaty's nonproliferation pillar by
discussing what the United States has done, alone and in concert with others, to
implement the Treaty and advance this elernent of the 20 10 Action Plan. I would
also like to address the nonproliferation developments that continue to challenge
the Treaty and international peace and security, I will highlight the U.S. efforts to
support International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, so vital to the NPT and
nonproliferation in general, and discuss progress made since the Review
Conference on nuclear weapon-free zones. These are only a few examples of U.S.
efforts to advance the Treaty's nonproliferation pillar, and I draw your attention to
the U.S. working paper on nonproliferation, PrepCom Working Paper 21, for a
more detailed account.

U.S. Support for Strengthened IAEA Safeguards
Mr. Chaiman, it is important to recall that the 2010 Action Plan calls on
Parties "to ensure that the IAEA continues to have all political, technical, and
financial support so that it is able to effectively meet its" safeguards
responsibilities under the NPT's Article 111. With a view to preventing diversion
of nuclear energy to purposes proscribed in the Treaty, Article I11 requires nonnuclear-weapon states parties to conclude a comprehensive safeguards agreement
with the IAEA. The IAEA safeguards system is fundamental to the NPT's
nonproliferation pillar and the larger nonproliferation regime, and the Action Plan
recognizes this in its calls for universality of comprehensive safeguards agreements
and the Additional Protocol, and for NPT Parties to support the safeguards system.
-2-

The IAEA has made clear that it cannot provide credible assurances of the
absence of undeclared nuclear activities in a state through a comprehensive
safeguards agreement alone. To do so, the M A needs the additional authorities
contained in the Additional Protocol. The United States welcomes the fact that
115 states now have an Additional Protocol in force, signifying that this agreement
has become the international safeguards standard.
The United States welcomes the fact that four states have brought their NPTmandated comprehensive safeguards agreements into force since the 20 10 Review
Conference; we urge the 14 NPT Parties that have still not done so to conclude and
implement such agreements. We also encourage those states that have safeguards
agreements in force with a small quantities protocol, but have not yet modified that
protocol according to IAEA Board guidance, to modify these protocols as soon as
possible, as urged by the 2010 Action Plan.
Fourteen states have brought an Additional Protocol into force since the
20 10 Review Conference as encouraged by the Action Plan, making a concrete
contribution to a stronger nonproliferation regime. We urge the remaining states
without an Additional Protocol in force to bring one into force as soon as possible.
Assistance is available for states taking these steps. To supplement the
efforts of the IAEA, we have worked with a number of states to underscore the
importance of these safeguards agreements and to facilitate the full implementation
of the agreements already in force.

Mr. Chairman, the United States is working with many likeminded NPT
Parties in coordinating outreach to stress the importance of the Protocol for all
states, even those with limited nuclear material and activities. In addition, the

United States has strongly supported IAEA efforts to help states understand the
Additional Protocol's requirements and prepare for implementation of the
Protocol. Furthermore, direct U.S. assistance in these areas is ongoing with a
number of partners. These efforts are an important part of our commitment to the
nonproliferation elements of the 20 10 Action Plan, and we recognize the essential
contribution to the NPT being made by the Parties working to implement their new
Protocols or preparing to bring an Additional Protocol into force.
I note that the IAEA is hosting a side event today on the application of
safeguards in NPT Parties. The IAEA has the principal responsibility for working
with states to implement their safeguards agreement, but such help is also available
from some NPT Parties. During tomorrow's lunch break, the U.S. Mission in
Vienna will host an event in room M3 to describe the many sources of assistance
that are available as they seek to implement their safeguards agreements, including
the Additional Protocol. I encourage all interested states to attend these events.
In his 2009 Prague speech, President Obama called for more resources and
authority to strengthen international inspections. The United States, along with
other NPT Parties, has been working hard to respond to this call. We strongly
support the IAEA7scontinuing effort to strengthen its safeguards regime by
implementing IAEA verification activities based on an assessment of all nuclear
activities in a state. This evolution of the safeguards system, utilizing all the
safeguards-relevant information available to the IAEA, is allowing the Agency to
focus its verification efforts where they are most needed. The goal of this effort is
to provide assurances regarding the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
from peaceful activities and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities. We will continue to provide the Agency expertise and resources in

support of the continued evolution of strengthened safeguards, and urge all NPT
parties to do likewise.

Budget Support
As more states conclude safeguards agreements and more facilities are
placed under safeguards, the resources of the IAEA are increasingly under strain.
The United States has strongly supported increases to the IAEA regular budget in
recent years. The IAEA's budget for 2012 represents more than a 2% increase in
real terms, providing additional resources for most areas of the Agency's work,
including safeguards. Nonetheless, more needs to be done in this area, as many of
the Agency's core activities remain unfunded in the regular budget.
The United States has long provided extra-budgetary support to the IAEA
for safeguards, including by enhancing its technical capabilities, through efforts
such as the U.S. Support Program for Safeguards and the Next Generation
Safeguards Initiative. A major contribution has been our extra-budgetary
contribution of more than 14 million euros for the construction of a new
Safeguards Analytical Laboratory and nuclear material laboratory.

U.S. Safeguards Agreements

Mr. Chaiman, the United States offers the same transparency regarding civil
nuclear facilities that non-nuclear-weapon states are asked to provide. Our
"voluntary offer" safeguards agreement with the IAEA entered into force in 1980,
and our Additional Protocol came into force in 2009. Under our voluntary offer
agreement, the United States has made nearly 300 nuclear facilities eligible for
IAEA safeguards, The IAEA has carried out hundreds of inspections in U.S.

-5-

facilities, many at facilities containing material removed permanently from weapon
programs. Last year, under the Additional Protocol the United States declared over
370 activities to the IAEA, and since the 2010 RevGon we have hosted two
complementary access visits by I m A inspectors under our Additional Protocol.

Securing Fissile Material
The Nuclear Security Summits of 20 10 in Washington and Seoul in 20 12
demonstrated the agreement arnong leaders of the seriousness of nuclear terrorism,
the need to protect nuclear materials, and the leading role of the IAEA in this area;
the importance of these issues is reflected in the 2010 Action Plan. We will
discuss U.S. efforts on nuclear security in greater detail in Cluster Three, including
our commitment to carrying out the requirements of UN Security Council
Resolution 1540, and our strong support to the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Group of Eight Global Partnership.

Nonproliferation Challenges

Mr. Chairman, President Obama made the need for compliance clear in the
Prague speech when he said, "Rules must be binding. Violations must be
punished. Words must mean something. The world must stand together to prevent
the spread of these weapons." While the 2010 Action Plan encourages NPT
Parties to take all of the actions that I have discussed to strengthen the Treaty and
the larger nonproliferation regime, the Action Plan also emphasizes the importance
of compliance with the Treaty's nonproliferation obligations. The 2010 RevCon
underscored the importance of "addressing all compliance matters in order to
uphold the Treaty's integrity and the authority of the safeguards system" and

"resolving all cases of non-compliance with safeguards obligations." It is vitally
important that all NPT Parties support the resolution of all cases of noncompliance
with I M A safeguards, relevant UN Security Council Resolutions, and other
nonproliferation requirements. The Treaty is only as strong as the Parties'
willingness to maintain its integrity.
With very few exceptions, NPT non-nuclear weapon states have
demonstrated their commitment to the NPT by complying with its provisions, and
working with partners to strengthen Treaty implementation. Unfortunately,
challenges to full compliance with nuclear nonproliferation regime remain.
We remain concerned by Iran's persistent failure to comply with its
nonproliferation obligations, including IAEA safeguards obligations and UN
Security Council resolutions, and we welcome the discussions between the P5+1
and Iran in Istanbul April 14. We seek a sustained process that produces concrete
results, and call on Iran to take urgent practical steps to build confidence and lead
to compliance with all its international obligations. We will be guided in these
efforts by the step-by-step approach and the principle of reciprocity. The NPT
forms a key basis, together with the resolutions of the UN Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors, for what must be serious engagement on Iran's nuclear

program, to ensure that Iran meets all of its nonproliferation obligations, while
respecting Iran's right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in conformity with
Articles I, 11, and 111of the Treaty. Iran's engagement with the P5t-1 is separate
from the equally urgent obligation for Iran to cooperate fully with the verification
efforts of the IAEA. We are concerned that Iran has not agreed to grant the IAEA
access to all relevant sites, information, documents and persons necessary to
resolve questions about its nuclear program, including concerns about its possible
military dimensions reported by the IAEA in November 201 1. Therefore, we

stress the urgent need for Iran to reach agreement with the IAEA on a structured
approach, based on IAEA verification practices, to resolve all outstanding issues.

With regard to Syria, M A Director General Amano reported in May 201 1
that the facility destroyed in 2007 at Dair Alzour was "very likely" an undeclared
nuclear reactor. In June 20 11, the IAEA Board of Governors found Syria in
noncompliance with its safeguards agreement and, in accordance with the IAEA
Statute, referred the matter to the UN Security Council. It remains essential that
Syria fully cooperate with the IAEA to bring to closure the Dair Alzour
noncompliance issue and resolve questions that remain about other sites in Syria
that could possibly be related to Dair Alzour.
Turning to the DPRK, we note with serious concern its April 13 launch, in
violation of UN Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874. Such actions, in
clear contravention of its international obligations and commitments, call into
serious question the DPRK's commitment to denuclearization. The DPRK's
continued development of its nuclear program, including uranium enrichment, is a
clear violation of UN Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874 and its
commitments under the 2005 Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks. These
activities must cease immediately. We strongly urge the DPRK to abandon all
nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs and return, at an early date, to the
NPT and IAEiA safeguards. We reaffirm our support for a diplomatic resolution of
the DPRK's nuclear issue. We call on the DPRK to refrain from further
provocative actions, including any nuclear tests, and take concrete and
demonstrable steps to fulfill its international obligations and commitments.

U.S. Support for Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
Mr. Chairman, nuclear-weapon-free zones provide valuable regional
reinforcement to the NPT and the global nonproliferation regime, When they are
properly crafted and rigorously implemented under appropriate conditions, they
can contribute to regional and international peace, security, and stability.
The United States is party to Protocols I and I1 of the Latin American
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. It is a signatory to the relevant Protocols to the South
Pacific and African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone treaties, and, consistent with the
commitment made by Secretary of State Clinton at the 20 10 Review Conference,
has submitted these Protocols to the U.S. Senate for its advice and consent to
ratification. Also, as Secretary Clinton pledged at the 20 10 RevCon, we have
reached substantive agreement among the nuclear weapon states and Treaty Parties
on issues related to the Protocol of the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
Treaty. The United States plans to sign the Protocol in the near future. The United
States also remains prepared to continue consulting with parties to the Central
Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.

Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, the 2010 Action Plan provides a way forward to fulfill our
individual and collective obligations and to strengthen the Treaty and enhance the
nonproliferation regime. Doing so includes effective efforts to respond to
violations of the Treaty and its required safeguards. The past two years have seen
significant progress on the Action Plan, but much work still remains to be done.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

