
At the outset I would like to congratulate you for your election as President of the Review Conference. Your efficiency and dedication guarantee that our sessions will be fruitful. We are convinced that through your leadership and diplomatic experience you will successfully guide the revision of an essential instrument for international peace and security and cornerstone for the beginning of a genuine process of nuclear disarmament.
As a general principle, the Argentine Republic considers that it is necessary for substantial advances to take place in a balanced manner for the fulfillment of the three pillars of the Treaty: nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
I would like to underline the relevance and importance of the Non- Proliferation Treaty for my country and reiterate the absolute commitment of Argentina to its objectives and provisions and reiterate once again the call for a world free of nuclear weapons. Today we must regret the expansion of proliferation In a distressing way and that the nuclear weapon States are not only five.
The nuclear arsenals in possession of the States Parties to the Non- Proliferation Treaty continue to grow in an overwhelming dimension and represent the highest threat to collective security and to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. It is disheartening to see the limited contribution and will of these States to fulfill their obligations under the NPT. They are the only ones that seem not to have fulfilled their responsibilities.
However, two recent developments, even though insufficient, allow for renewed hope for progress. The first has been the agreement signed by the United States and the Russian Federation that will allow for the beginning of a process of reduction of their respective arsenals by one third. We welcome the signature of this instrument and hope that both delegations will continue the negotiations until they reach a point that will allow for the inclusion of all nuclear- weapon States. The second has been the unilateral declaration by the United States not to produce new nuclear weapons nor conduct any nuclear tests. We appreciate the scope of this declaration.
These steps must be completed with the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test- Ban Treaty without any further delays and with a negotiation in the Disarmament Conference. Two questions are of particular importance. One is the Treaty to Ban the Production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices and the other one should be the negotiation of an instrument of negative security assurances. In this sense, the negative assurances announced by the United States not to use or threat to use nuclear weapons against other States Parties to the NPT is, in our opinion, a step in the right direction.
In the same context, we call on the Nuclear- Weapon States that have ratified the Additional Protocol to the Treaty of Tlatelolco with reservations and unilateral interpretative declarations to withdraw those declarations in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty and to avoid diminishing its efficacy. The commitment that the nuclear- weapon- free zones represent cannot and should not have to rely on the uncertainty of the use, the threat of use or on the eventual presence of nuclear weapons, be it permanent or temporary, in the regions covered by the treaties establishing those zones.
Mr. President,
Allow me to take this opportunity to acknowledge the efficient work of the International Atomic Energy Agency and its new Director General in ensuring the fulfillment of the commitments under the Non- Proliferation Treaty. In this sense, I would like to reiterate our confidence in the operative capability of theAgency to fulfill its purposes, in the safeguards mechanisms and the importance we give to the strengthening of all the other technical areas with responsibility in the development of nuclear energy and in the maintenance of international cooperation.
This Review Conference is of a very special character to my country. In a few more days we will celebrate 60 years of peaceful nuclear activities, an activity for the benefit of welfare and health of the Argentine people and other peoples around the world who have benefited from the technology we actively develop, produce and export in accordance with international law.
Argentina celebrates and shares the emphasis on the safe and responsible processing of nuclear material and equipment. The recent Nuclear Security Summit in Washington is a clear indication of the importance of this matter under the current international circumstances. We support this approach in a concrete manner. Our country has successfully completed the process of reducing the use of highly enriched uranium in its nuclear research reactors, being the first country to rely in low-enriched uranium for its total production of radioisotopes.
—A4-the-same time, we believe that international cooperation in all the peaceful uses of nuclear energy has a central role. We also consider important the strengthening of the conditions that allow international cooperation to the demands of ail the States to use the scientific and practical knowledge, in accordance with the needs of their population. From this perspective, Argentina will always be open to continue working bilaterally or in the framework of the IAEA to share the multiple benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in particular when a new frontier opens up.
The geometric growth that this activity will entail within the next few years, both in my country and in the rest of the world, reveals the importance of having an international trade that is capable of offering the best available technologies, avoiding paratechnological distortions or other irresponsible attitudes that could affect commercial possibilities. We are convinced that a transparent trade strengthens all the objectives of the Non- Proliferation Treaty.
Our practical experience gives us the opportunity to appreciate the advantages that the positive mechanisms of non- proliferation offer. Several years ago, together with Brazil we have done away with the ghost of nuclear competition in Latin America which would have diverted resources we so deeply need for the wellbeing of our people and that, at the same time, would have increased mistrust between brother peoples.
The results achieved with the establishment of the system of mutual safeguards on the nuclear installations and material applied by the Brazilian-Argentine Agency on Accountability and Control is one example.
Mr. President,
The proliferation of nuclear weapons has to be avoided in a clear and verifiable manner. The noncompliance with the Treaty and its provisions cannot be accepted under any circumstances and should be condemned by the international community. There should be no hesitation on that regard.
Likewise, it is absolutely inadmissible that a State tries to withdraw or threatens to withdraw the Treaty and its legally binding provisions. We will spare no efforts to prevent that from happening, as well as to act resolutely to preserve the integrity of the NPT and its universality.
Recently in Washington we have advanced in emphasizing nuclear security, something that must have been certainly done before the threat posed by the possibility that non-State actors acquire nuclear weapons. We commend the strong commitment in favor of the IAEA forged at the recent Nuclear Security Summit. Follow up of this event towards the next Summit to be held in Seoul in 2010 will take place in Buenos Aires, at expert level, in the forthcoming months.
We will work with the same resolution to strengthen the provisions aimed at preventing terrorists from acquiring nuclear weapons or nuclear material. The international community will have to avoid compromising on this issue.
Mr. President,
We are determined to contribute to the promotion of all the aspects of the NPT and, in particular, those aimed at maintaining and strengthening the validity and significance of the Treaty, as well as that of its objectives and purposes. In this regard, we are convinced that the Non-Proliferation Treaty is the cornerstone that will free human kind from the slavery of living in a world of nuclear weapons.
Thank you.

















Mr. President,


Mr. President,






 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 2

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



