Non official translation
Madam President:
As I begin my statement, I would like to congratulate you for your election. We are
convinced that your compromise, leadership and experience will guide us towards a
successful Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
You can count with the cooperation of my delegation for your mission of guiding the work
of this Conference.
At the same time, allow me to express the condolences of Argentina to the peoples and
government of Nepal for the tragic earthquake that they were victims a few days ago.
My Delegation fully subscribes the statement to be delivered by the distinguish
Representative of Ecuador, on behalf of the Community of Latin-American and Caribbean
States (CELAC). In light of that, I'll limit myself to emphasize some points of special
relevance for my country.
The Argentine Republic wishes to reiterate its full and absolute compromise with the
objectives and purposes of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which
constitutes a key instrument ... for peace and international security, and the cornerstone of the
non- proliferation and disarmament regime.
At the same time, we wish to underline the necessity of achieving substantive progress in
the balanced fulfillment of the three pillars of the Treaty: nuclear disarmament, nuclear
non- proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Madam President:
Regarding the issue of non- proliferation, Argentina considers essential that countries
comply with their obligations under the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and its relevant safeguards agreements, which imply active cooperation in the
supply of relevant information regarding their respective nuclear programs.
In this context, I wish to express the recognition of my Delegation to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the efficient work it has been undertaking in order to 
assure the compromises that emerge from the Treaty, and the execution of the safeguards
mechanisms.
In the same sense we also want to recognize the work that is developed, in the case of my
country, by the Brazilian-Argentine Agency of Accountability and Control of Nuclear
Materials (ABACC). That regional agency, jointly with the IAEA and the Governments of
Argentina and Brazil articulate under the framework of the four-side Agreement of 1991 a
system of double control over the nuclear facilities of both countries: it has a regional
dimension in charge of ABACC, and another universal dimension from behalf of IAEA.
By the means of this unique system, reinforced and superior guarantees than those
demanded by Article III of the Treaty are provided.
Since my country is part of the first densely populated area to be declared free from nuclear
weapons based on the Treaty of Tlatelolco, I want to reiterate our conviction that the
establishment of nuclear weapon free zones, negotiated among countries of each region,
contribute in a significant way to peace and security.
At the same time, I wish to express, once more, the request to those States that have issued
interpretative declarations to the Protocols of the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the withdrawal of
them, in compliance with the text of the instrument. Full adherence to all Nuclear Weapons
Free Zones is needed from nuclear powers.
Regarding this issue we would like to draw the attention of this Review Conference to the
situation created due to the behavior of the United Kingdom, which, in the framework of its
campaign for militarization of the South Atlantic, has introduced in the denuclearized area
of the Treaty of Tlatelolco submarines with the capacity to deliver nuclear weapons, and
has refused to provide assurances of the absence of nuclear weapons. This behavior )
constitutes itself an implicit threat that we have strongly rejected. We the States that have
renounced to nuclear weapons have the right to live without being threatened by those who,
under the Treaty on the Non Proliferation have committed to disarmament and have not
complied yet.
In the area of non proliferation that we are analyzing, we wish to specially emphasize the
initial agreement that has been reached between the Six Countries (United States, Russian 
Federation, United Kingdom, France and China) on the one hand, and Iran on the other,
which lays down the bases for a balanced solution to the crisis created by the nuclear
capacities of Iran.
This initial agreement that has been reached preserves the principle that any violation to the
Treaty on the Non Proliferation will not be validated by the international community. At
the same time it emphasizes the sovereign right of the countries for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Finally, it respects the principle of peaceful solution for conflicts by the mean of
negotiations.
We look forward for a successful development of the initial agreement achieved, through
negotiations planned to address specific issues, to be finished in the month of June.
Madam President:
I would now like to refer to the pillar of peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
The last years have been marked by two perspectives on this issue. On the one hand, the
revaluation of the generation of nuclear energy in light of the necessity to count with
sources of energy that do not have an impact in the global emissions of carbon. On the
other, the importance of improving standards of physical protection and technological
security of nuclear facilities.
My country has a long-term trajectory in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
due to the investigation, design and production of this technology since several decades.
Being Argentina a developing country, this achievements demand huge efforts in terms of
human and financial resources.
At the same time, my country considers that international cooperation in the field of nuclear
technology for peaceful uses plays a central role for contributing to satisfy the necessities of
States in terms of social and economical development. In this context, Argentina has been
and will be open to provide cooperation, in order to share and transmit experiences
regarding pacific uses of nuclear energy for human welfare and development. Several
delegation present here can give testimony of our willingness in this issue. 
In the development of the above mentioned cooperation actions, Argentina is in line with
the highest standards in terms of export controls, embodied in the guidelines of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, which we have the privilege to chair since June 2014.
From that point of view of holders and responsible exporter of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes, we follow with concern any type of initiative that tries to hamper or
deter the capacity of States to fully use the right to nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes.
Madam President:
Progress achieved in the pillars of non proliferation and peaceful uses, to which we have
already referred to, do not correspond with the lack of sustained progress with regard to the
fulfillment of the obligation of nuclear powers to reduce their arsenals. This situation
attempts against the balance of obligations that derive from the three pillars of the Treaty,
and undermine international peace and security.
Against this, it is necessary and urgent to advance towards the goal of nuclear disarmament,
achieving the complete and general elimination of nuclear weapons. As pointed out by the
Community of Latinamerican and Caribbean States (CELAC), the continued existence of
nuclear weapons and there possible use represent a threat against humanity. It is therefore
necessary to advance towards complete and verifiable disarmament. The complete
elimination of nuclear weapons constitutes the only guarantee against weapons whose
potential use by any state, inside or outside the Treaty, would have irreparable humanitarian
consequences.
In the same sense, we cannot put off anymore the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, for what it is still required the ratification of essential actors.
Furthermore, the necessary political will must be demonstrated in order to overcome the
stagnation that exists in the Conference on Disarmament, in order to advance, among other
issues, in an instrument of Negative Security Assurances.
At the conclusion of this intervention, I wish to share some final reflections. 
The proliferation of nuclear weapons cannot be tolerated. Failure to comply with the Treaty
and its dispositions cannot pass unnoticed, and deserves the strongest condemnation and
most vehement reaction from behalf of all of us.
At the same time, there is still work to be done in order to advance with regard to full
universalization of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation.
Regarding the possibility of withdrawing from the Treaty, paragraph 1 of Article X
establishes - against an extraordinary event - a right that is an integral and inseparable part
of a delicate legal balance over which the Treaty on the Non Proliferation is founded. This
right must not be restricted.
At the same time, there exists a worrying precedent of a case in which an abusive use of
this right took place, with severe consequences for international security. However being
an isolated event thus far, the analysis of that possibility occurring again in the future
should not be dismissed. In this respect, it would be convenient to identify possible ways to
respond to or deter another abusive case of use of Article X paragraph 1, without
undermining in any way the sovereign exercise of the legitimate right to withdraw under
the exceptional conditions established in the Treaty.
The Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is our best tool for advancing
towards a world free from nuclear weapons, more safer and peaceful, eliminating thereby
eliminating the most grave threat that tigers against humanity.
However, the Treaty on the Non Proliferation is essentially a security treaty, and only its
full application can provide security for all.
Thank you very much. 