Mr. Chairman:
Please allow me to begin by warmly extending a very special greeting to you. Ambassador Sergio Queiroz Duarte. We are delighted to be able to count on the invaluable experience of an excellent diplomat from Brazil, a sister nation, to direct the work of this conference. Your experience in the field of disarmament is well known by us. We congratulate the Chairman, the other members of the Table, and the Conference Secretary on your election to preside over our work. Mr. Chairman, you may be assured of the full cooperation of the Argentine delegation.
Since the reestablishment of democracy, more than 20 years ago, Argentina has undertaken a series of actions whose common denominators have been the strengthening of integration with our neighbors, a ban on weapons of mass destruction and participation in the international arena in an effort to consolidate a safer, more stable world based on the values of democracy, market freedom, the rule of law, human rights and international security, with the purpose that all nations could successfully achieve their objectives of development and fighting poverty.
Among Argentina's contributions to the subject that concerns us today, the process of transparency, mutual trust and convergence of nuclear policies developed together with Brazil takes a prominent place. As you may know, Mr. Chairman, as an actor of this process, it began precisely with the return to democracy in both countries. It gradually gathered momentum and allowed us to establish a system of mutual safeguards over the nuclear installations and materials of both countries, with the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) as application authority.
Argentina's subsequent ratification of the NPT, of which 2005 sees the tenth anniversary, was the culmination of our commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and non-proliferation, and was an opportunity to be present at the historic moment in which the Conference extended the Treaty indefinitely and set the principles and objectives required to build for the future.
Mr. Chairman
In order to advance towards a world free of nuclear weapons, the international community has created a series of instruments and initiatives intended to serve as the foundations for the non-proliferation and disarmament regime, which can only be constructed with the contribution of all its members.
Our country is therefore concerned that nine years after the adoption of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), some ten of the 44 countries whose ratification is necessary for the Treaty to enter into force have so far failed to ratify. It is extremely important that nuclear weapons States compromise not to improve their weapons through nuclear tests. We urge all States that have not yet ratified the CTBT, to adopt the necessary steps to assure its universality. We advocate maintaining the moratorium on nuclear weapons tests.
It is also deeply troubling to note that, despite being the Disarmament Conference the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community, it has been unable to open negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT); nor, due to the lack of agreement on a Programme of Work, has it established a subsidiary organ with sufficient mandate to address nuclear disarmament.
In view of this disappointing panorama in the area of nuclear disarmament, it would seem appropriate at this point to recall that the NPT establishes a balance of obligations between those states possessing nuclear weapons and those that do not. Of course, this balance in no way legitimizes permanent possession of such weapons, nor should it be used by the non nuclear weapons States in order to justify their lack of commitment concerning their own obligations. The purpose of the NPT should not be, as the argentine Delegation to the First Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations General Assembly, declared, the "disarmament of the disarmed".
Argentina cannot help but express to this Review Conference its concern at the crisis of compliance with commitments on non-proliferation to which we have been witness over the last five years.
In this context, I would like to stress, once more, that although we acknowledge some progress in the field of disarmament, the steps taken are still not enough, and it is necessary to continue them, with renewed efforts, in order to achieve the goal of general and complete nuclear disarmament. No doubt about it, today's world, has exceeding nuclear arsenals to fulfill any State's security needs and this fact endangers collective security.
Mr. Chairman
Above all, Argentina is convinced that in order to attain the objectives of non-proliferation, rational application must be made of the existent elements of the international regime specifically designed to that end. The application of safeguards cannot be separated from the principles of efficiency and effectiveness; the tendency to overlook those parameters is extremely tempting as a form of evading any form of discrimination, but automatic and mechanical verification processes do no more than contribute to the degradation of the entire system.
My country has participated in the drafting process of the Model Additional Protocol in the framework of the IAEA and favors its universalization. This protocol perfects the regime and is a confidence-building measure for those countries where doubts persist about the peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes. It should not be forgotten however that adhesion to this instrument is completely voluntary. Argentina is currently engaged in negotiations with the IAEA, Brazil and the ABACC prior to its conclusion and is observing very closely the rationality of the application in countries with relevant nuclear activity and in which the protocol is in force. It is our intention to move forward to the ratification of the Protocol.
I would like to stress, the importance we give to the developments in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Argentina, being a country that have developed the technologies related to the full nuclear fuel cycle, recognizes the relevance of addressing carefully the threats derived from those technologies In order not to restrict the legitimate developments achieved, like in the case of Argentina, by other peace loving countries.
It is essential that the safeguard regime be accompanied by a collective safety system that assigns differentiated responsibilities to countries possessing nuclear weapons and which are also permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. This combination provides a potentiality that is far from exhausted in tackling crises of nuclear proliferation. Meanwhile, we should avoid imposing general restrictions on the right to develop and acquire legitimate technologies. Safeguards for all, restrictions only on those who fail to comply.
The Security Council's adoption last year of Resolution 1540, coinciding with the meetings of the last Preparatory Commission, is an enormous contribution to the cause of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the fight against terrorism. Fortunately, Resolution 1540 universalizes measures such as the export control systems that Argentina has implemented in keeping with the policy of active participation in non-proliferation regimes.
Mr. Chairman
As expressed in the recent "Conference of States Parties and Signatories of treaties that Establish Nuclear- Weapon-Free Zones,' which was held in Mexico City last week, Argentina favors the creation of such zones, the full adhesion to them by all the states in the affected regions and by the nuclear powers by means of the respective protocols.
Therefore, and in particular relation to the Tlatelolco Treaty, Argentina invites all states possessing nuclear weapons to review the Interpretative statements they made at the signing of the additional protocols to the Treaty, with a view to possibly retracting them. This attitude will contribute to a more effective Latin-American nuclear weapons free zone.
Mr. Chairman
Argentina reaffirms its commitment to the universality and strengthening of the Treaty. The NPT provides the broadest consensus on a non-proliferation and disarmament treaty, and my country will spare no efforts in preserving its integrity and legitimacy.. The case of the DPRK is symptomatic. We cannot afford to lose sight of a basic principle: that the development of nuclear weapons outside the NPT, or lack of compliance with it, can never provide an advantage. We must reverse the perception that attitudes such as these no longer generate costs or that, even more seriously, they grant a privileged space in the international community or even less in the United Nations.
Argentina therefore wishes to continue emphasizing its support for the working document on education for disarmament and non-proliferation.
In compliance with the recommendations contained in the United Nations study, Argentina has sought to strengthen links with regional and international organizations, civil society and government organizations in order to contribute to the development of a culture and mentality in defense of the precepts of disarmament and non-proliferation.
In particular, with a view to contributing to greater solidarity between cities of the world that are committed to total abolition of nuclear weapons and to promoting the Programme of the "Mayors for Peace" NGO, four cities in Argentina, -including Ushuaia, the southernmost city in the world-, recently joined more than 900 other cities that advocate a world free of nuclear weapons.
Argentina shares the interests of other member states in favor of advancing the objectives of the treaty, complying fully with the decisions adopted in 1995, and the commitments contained both in the Treaty and in the Final Documents resulting from other Review Conferences, particularly the "Thirteen Steps" adopted in the 2000 Review Conference. There is no doubt that certain aspects of the Treaty will need to be strengthened, such as those on provisions in cases of non-compliance and withdrawal, specific aspects of disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy, among others.
In short, Argentina trusts that the 2005 Review Conference will offer us all the opportunity to make a profound, constructive review of the Treaty, to identify future steps and, especially, the conviction required to take them.
Thank you.
