Mr. President,
For the 35 years of its existence, the NPT has become a cornerstone for international security by mobilizing global efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It is a multilateral security agreement with the widest membership. Two years ago we welcomed Cuba's and Timor-Leste's joining the Treaty, which was a positive contribution to the process of nuclear disarmament and another step towards the universalization of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Cuba's accession to the Tlatelolco Treaty made the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and the Caribbean complete. This year we welcome the encouraging steps taken by the Central Asian States in establishing a Nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia.
Since the last Review Conference the Treaty has registered serious progress in advancing the non-proliferation objectives. The US-Russian Treaty on Reductions of Strategic Offensive Weapons, also known as the Moscow Treaty, entered into force. Libya made a decision to abandon its nuclear weapons program, which was a vivid demonstration of the understanding that national security interests are better served by a full compliance with the NPT regime.
However, outstanding issues still persist. Despite the impressive number of signatories to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and those that have ratified it, the Treaty has yet to enter into force. The Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMST) negotiations have yet to start. The recent revelations of clandestine nuclear networks have urged all states to take resolute actions to stop the illicit trafficking of weapons of mass destruction (WMD). In this regard, the Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), which addresses the challenges of non-state actors gaining access to WMD, was an important measure. The recent discoveries also made the need for additional measures to strengthen the NPT and the verification efforts even more imperative. In this respect, Armenia encourages finding negotiated solutions to the outstanding nuclear issues in the world and supports all efforts towards it.
Mr. President,

Nuclear safety continues to remain a matter of highest priority for my country. Armenia fully shares the objectives of the international community regarding non-proliferation and the promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. From the outset Armenia has rejected the option of developing nuclear energy other than for peaceful purposes. Being the first country in the CIS to sign the

Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and its additional Protocol with the IAEA and to implement the agreement itself, Armenia is successfully moving forward towards strengthening the cooperation in this field. In January 2004 the additional Protocol was ratified and went into force. In this respect, we would like to support IAEA's Director General's suggestion to acknowledge by the 7th NPT Review Conference that the additional Protocol is an integral part of Agency's safeguards in every country party to the NPT.
Shortly after the formal accession to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non- nuclear-weapon state, my country took an obligation to place all nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, which it fulfills successfully. Armenia considers it important that all states that use or are planning to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes open themselves to effective IAEA monitoring.
Armenia fully supports and endorses the IAEA's efforts to enhance the safety and security of radioactive sources. In his letter to the IAEA Director-General in August 2004, Armenian Foreign Minister informed of my country's commitment to follow and work towards the guidance contained in the IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources and to encourage other countries to do the same.
Recently, Armenia presented its National Report to the 3rd Review Meeting on Convention on Nuclear Safety and responded to about 100 questions raised by other Contracted Parties. In the final Summary report Armenia was commended for its open and transparent collaboration with IAEA and was encouraged to further continue to upgrade the nuclear safety of the Armenian Nuclear Power Plant.
During the G8 Senior Group meeting with the former Soviet Union States in Geneva in September 2004, Armenia was recognized as a participant to G8 Global Action against Non-Proliferation (2002 Kananaskis Summit) and accepted the guidelines contained therein.
Mr. President,
Efficient functioning of export-control becomes more important with the increased threat of international terrorism amplified by the risk of proliferation of WMD through the acquisition of those weapons by non-state actors. Armenia believes that effective international export control regimes play important role in further advancement of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation goals thus ensuring the implementation of Article m of the Treaty. My country spares no effort to strengthen its national export control system through the introduction of international non-proliferation criteria into the national legislation in a way that would guarantee the legitimate use and trade of the dual-use items and technologies. The "Law on State Control over and the Export of Dual-Use Items and Technologies, as well as Its Transit through the Territory of the Republic of Armenia" ratified and entered into force at the end of 2003 is another step towards that end.
Mr. President,
Armenia believes that disarmament and non-proliferation objectives could only be achieved through vigorous and concerted efforts at bilateral, regional and international levels. The memory of the events of 9/11 is a constant reminder to push forward the international agenda of disarmament, non- proliferation and arms control with doubled efforts through strict observance of existing international instruments and strengthening of multilateralism. Armenia stands ready to have its contribution in making our world safer and more secure.
Thank you.
