AUSTRALIAN MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS E-mail australia@un.int :q~:>~_ ... ;=%<~, .'oN .:0_"'" ",~~, '·""M.AA<'1;l~""'~=~"'=li<'m:S1il$,:",~ ... ;.n" ••• ;'1$""~ ____ 'f'I;
150 East 42nd Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 35 1 6600 Fax212 - 3516610 www.AustraliaUN.org
Third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Statement by Ambassador Peter Woolcott, Australian Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Geneva and Ambassador for
Disarmament
28 April 2014
(Check against delivery)
Mr Chairman,
May I congratulate you on your appointment as Chairman of this third session ofthe
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference. I look forward to working
with you and assure you of my support and that of my delegation.
For Au~tralia , and I am sure for all Member States here, the NPT is the centrepiece of
international efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, make progress in reducing
existing nuclear arsenals and ultimately realise the goal of a world without nuclear
weapons.
In order to achieve this, all of us need to work collectively, and with determination, to
strengthen implementation of the NPT across all three pillars, and strengthen the
commitments and obligations its State Parties have agreed to undertake, including those
of the Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) and Non-Nuclear Weapon States (non NWS).
Mr Chairman,
Australia is the proud co-founder with Japan of the twelve-member Nuclear NonProliferation
and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), established in 2010 to encourage full
implementation of the 20 I 0 Review Conference Action Plan.
NPDI ministers recently met in Hiroshima to discuss our collective approach to the NPT
PrepCom. The NPDI is a big tent and we bring different perspectives to bear, but we all
share one thing in common: a desire to see the world eventually free of nuclear weapons.
The NPDI has submitted six working papers to this PrepCom session, reflecting our key
priorities: de-alerting nuclear forces; Post-New START nuclear disarmament; the Middle 

- 2 -
East Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone; nuclear security; nuclear transparency;
and on NPT withdrawal.
Australia is also pleased to join our fellow members of the longstanding Vienna Group of
Ten, in submitting a working paper which focuses delegates' minds on the importance of
pillar 2 and 3 issues to the health of the NPT.
We hope these working papers will stimulate discussion and provide new ideas that
support the implementation of the 2010 RevCon consensus outcome and help lay the
groundwork for a successful 2015 RevCon outcome.
Mr Chairman
Australia underl ines the enormous responsibilities of the Nuclear Weapon States to drive
disarmament. We acknowledge that some of the Nuclear Weapon States, especially the United
States and Russia, have made considerable reductions in their nuclear arsenals.
The results of the New START Treaty are encouraging.
We also recognise that the United Kingdom and France have made welcome progress in
reducing their nuclear arsenals.
We applaud these effolts.
But the international community expects each ofthe P5 and other nuclear-armed states to do
much more, and to show a genuine commitment to nuclear transparency. Greater transparency
from the Nucl ear-Weapons States will help create conditions more conducive to further
progress in disarmament.
Australia remains committed to this endeavour.
This is why Australia looks forward to hearing the P5's contributions to this PrepCom
session, including on the crucial issue of transparency through reporting, on the Glossary,
and on their discussions about nuclear doctrines, strategic stability and how they propose
to build greater strategic trust to underpin further substantive progress in meeting their
disarmament obligations. Without greater strategic trust it is difficult to progress nuclear
disarmament: it cannot be unilateral.
Mr Chairman,
Australia continues to be deeply disappointed by the failure of the Conference on
Disarmament to do the work assigned to it, in particular the failure to commence
negotiations on the long-overdue Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty. Nevertheless we
welcome the recent first session of the FMCT Group of Govemment Experts process and
look forward to discussing how its proposals can help take forward the 2010 Action Plan
agenda and bring fresh impetus to the work the CD should be doing. 
- 3 -
Mr Chairman,
Australia welcomes the fact that since the last PrepCom three more States have ratified
the CTBT - Guinea-Bissau, Iraq and Niue. But we are deeply disappointed that the
world is still awa iting the entry into force of the CTBT. Australia is a co-chair of the
Friends of the CTBT group, and entry into force is a major Australian priority. Australia,
together with the other NPDr member states, again urges all remaining Annex 2 States to
ratify the treaty without delay and without waiting for other States to ratify the Treaty.
Mr Chairman,
Australia reaffirms the right of countries to access nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
However, effective safeguards must underpin this access to address the proliferation risks
inherent in the spread of nuclear technology. Along with our NPDI colleagues, Australia
continues to advocate for States to adopt the Additional Protocol to the IAEA
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement. We have conducted outreach to a number of
States yet to conclude an Additional Protocol and stand ready to respond to requests for
assistance from States implementing an Additional Protocol.
Mr Chairman,
Australia also strongly supports the convening of a conference on the establishment of a
Middle-East Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone at the earliest possible opportunity.
We were encouraged by the outcomes of the Glion preparatory meetings, and encourage
all relevant states to palticipate in the Helsinki conference. We call upon all States in the
region to engage in a spirit of genuine and constructive cooperation on this important
goal.
Mr Chairman,
Australia remains deeply concerned by the actions of the DPRK which, alone among
nations in the twenty-first century, maintains an active nuclear explosive testing program,
challenging the disarmament and non-proliferation regime and contravening the
international norm that has already been established by the CTBT. No Member States
should be sil ent on this matter. We condemn the DPRK's third nuclear test on 12
February 201 3 and recent provocative rocket launches which also violated UN Security
Council Resolutions. Australia calls on North Korea to abandon its current path, cease its
provocations and abide by its international commitments, including UN Security Council
Resolutions.
While still concerned about the possible military dimensions ofIran's nuclear program,
nevertheless Australi a is encouraged by the progress to date in discussions between Iran
and the P5 + I under th e Joint Plan of Action and Framework of Cooperation agreed
between Iran and the IAEA in November 2013. We call on Iran to cooperate fully and
unconditionall y with the IAEA, and to demonstrate convincingly to the international
community the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear program. 
- 4 -
Mr Chairman,
We look forward to working with you during this meeting. We hope to maintain
momentum in implementing the Action Plan, as we move towards the NPT Review
Conference next year when we will need to decide on next steps towards our shared goal
of a world without nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Mr Chairman. 