AusTRIA PERMANENT MISSION OF AUSTRIA
:::::::::~:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::T:O:T:HE::UN:IT:E:D:N:A:TI:ON:S::::
Statement
by
Ambassador Alexander Kmentt
Director for Disarmament, Arms Control and Non-Proliferation
Federal Ministry for Europe, Integration and Foreign Affairs
at the
General Debate of the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 29 April 2014
600 THIRD AVENUE, 31ST FLOOR, NEW YORK, NY 10016 • TEL· (917) 542-8400 • FAX (212) 949-1840 
Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished delegates,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Ambassador Roman-Morey, on your
election as chair of this Preparatory Committee. You can count on our full support.
Austria aligns herself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and would also like to refer to the statement of the Vienna Group of 10.
This 3rd Preparatory Committee of the current review cycle will provide us with as yet
another opportunity to assess where the NPT membership stands with respect to the
balanced implementation of and compliance with the Treaty one year before the next
Review Conference. This meeting holds particular interest also due to the reporting
obligation for nuclear weapon states under action 5 of the 2010 conclusions and
recommendations for follow-on actions that Austria awaits with interest.
Mr. Chairman,
The Preparatory Committee also takes place against the background of the crisis in
the Ukraine, which lies in Austria's immediate neighborhood. We are deeply
concerned about the possible implications of this crisis for the global nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We are particularly concerned about
some comments in recent times that have attempted to present this crisis as a
validation of nuclear weapons possession and nuclear deterrence. In Austria's view,
such comments are entirely misplaced and irresponsible and only risk to unjustifiably
fuel the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Therefore, Austria would like to state clearly
that it views Ukraine's decision in 1994 to transfer the ex-Soviet nuclear weapon
stockpile to Russia and to join the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state as a very
important contribution to international as well as its own security. Ukraine and all
other states that have abandoned existing nuclear weapon stockpiles and programs
have reduced the risks of nuclear annihilation. They have made a tremendous
contribution to the security of their own peoples as well as to the security of
humankind at large.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria is strongly committed to the NPT, which remains a legal framework of key
importance for international peace, security, and nuclear cooperation. While it has
served the international community well in the past, we must recognize that its
credibility is seriously challenged on several key aspects. The treaty's effectiveness
in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons has been challenged. However,
there are increasing doubts to what extent the NPT can still be seen as an effective
and credible framework to achieve nuclear disarmament. The universality of the NPT
that we all strive for, is becoming an ever more remote possibility, which undermines
the NPT's value as a security and confidence building instrument in regional contexts.
Universality and cohesion of the treaty is also not helped by nuclear cooperation
being granted to states outside the NPT. The NPT membership needs to address all
these challenges with urgency to avoid further loss of confidence in the credibility of
the treaty. For every legal instrument there is only a finite level of inconsistencies or
credibility deficits that can be absorbed before the fundamental equilibrium of broad
support is disturbed. 
Mr. Chairman,
Austria has always supported the most stringent nuclear non-proliferation standards.
In this context, we are gravely concerned about the continuing build up of a nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles program in the DPRK. This remains a serious
challenge to the international community and the NPT. On the other hand, we are
encouraged about the negotiations under way with the aim to comprehensively
resolve the open questions and concerns about the Iranian nuclear program. We
hope that these negotiations will be successful and result in a strengthening of the
NPT and all its pillars. Also the case of Syria needs to be resolved.
However, the focus on proliferation is not sufficient. As long as some states regard
nuclear weapons as a legitimate security hedge for themselves, efforts to counter
nuclear proliferation will always suffer from a fundamental contradiction and credibility
deficit. Both the possession of nuclear weapons and reliance on nuclear deterrence
are drivers for proliferation. We are convinced that nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
efforts can only be successful if they are pursued together with the same
sense of urgency and credibility.
The conclusions and recommendations for follow on actions agreed to at the 2010
Review Conference (2010 Action Plan) underscore this urgency. They would, if
implemented credibly, put us on a right track to achieve nuclear disarmament and to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. One year away from the 2015 Review
Conference, we are concerned about the very limited progress in the implementation
of the Action Plan, in particular with respect to Article 6 of the treaty. We welcome
every step that is consistent with the Article 6 obligation and the objective of
achieving a world without nuclear weapons and we note the steps in this regard
taken by some nuclear weapon states. However, we are disappointed with what we
see as a continuing lack of readiness by nuclear weapon states to take the required
robust steps away from their reliance on nuclear weapons. Such steps are key
elements of the NPT disarmament agreements of 1995, 2000 and 2010. In order to
maintain global support for the NPT and the entire nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
regime and to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, nuclear-weapon
states need to add a lot more credibility and urgency to their nuclear disarmament
efforts.
Mr. Chairman,
In 2010, the NPT Review Conference resolved that "all States parties commit to
pursue policies that are fully compatible with the Treaty and the objective of achieving
a world without nuclear weapons". This Action 1 underscores that the implementation
of all provisions of the NPT, including Art. 6, is a collective responsibility of the entire
NPT membership. It is encouraging that non-nuclear-weapon states have focused on
this issue with a renewed sense of responsibility. Several initiatives have been
launched as a direct consequence of non-nuclear-weapon states' commitment to
Article 6 in line with Action 1 of the 2010 Action Plan. One of these initiatives was the
Open-ended Working Group established in accordance with UN General Assembly
Resolution 67/56. It met during 2013 and produced a substantive consensus report
including proposals for the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear
weapons. Another important manifestation of the shared wish to facilitate progress
was the high-level meeting of the UN General Assembly on nuclear disarmament on 
September 26, 2013. The Federal President of Austria, Heinz Fischer, addressed the
opening session 1 of this conference.
However, the most important development in line with Action 1 is the increased focus
by the international community on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear
weapons. This is a long overdue shift in the discourse on nuclear weapons, away
from the traditional narrow national security policy focus of possessor states in recent
times. Several cross-regional joint declarations by very large numbers of states have
been delivered on this issue during the NPT Review Process as well as in the UN
General Assembly. The facts-based discussions at the international conferences in
Oslo (2013) and Nayarit (2014) have contributed to a greater understanding of the
unacceptable immediate and long-term humanitarian consequences of nuclear
weapons explosions. Moreover, the considerable and unacceptable risks as a
consequence of proliferation, the vulnerability of nuclear command and control
networks, in particular to cyber-attacks, to human error and the potential access to
nuclear weapons by non-state actors, have been highlighted. Austria is convinced
that the focus on their humanitarian consequences has a positive effect on
international discussions about nuclear weapons. This forcefully underscores the
need to eliminate and prohibit nuclear weapons as a shared and urgent objective.
There is growing momentum to firmly anchor the humanitarian imperative in all
discussions about nuclear weapons and nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
In this context Austria is proud to host the 3'd international conference on the
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons which will take place on 8 and 9
December 2014 in Vienna. The conference will be open to all interested parties. All
states will receive an official invitation in the coming weeks. International
organizations and civil society representatives with relevant expertise will also be
welcome. We are grateful for the very positive comments that we have received so
far and look forward to working with all interested parties to ensure that the Vienna
conference provides a productive forum to generate momentum for progress on
nuclear disarmament. With this initiative, Austria wants to strengthen the NPT of
which the humanitarian dimension is an integral and essential part.
1 http 1/www un orp:/en{ga./68/meetmgslnucleardlsarmament/odf/AT en pdf 