1
Statement for General Debate
Second Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018
Mr Chairman
In a deteriorating international security environment, it remains
more vital than ever that we, the States Parties, affirm the NPT’s
centrality and continuously strengthen the NPT regime. Great
power relations are at a low ebb, while regional issues pose a
threat to global peace both in North Asia and in South Asia. In
these periods of tension, we cannot let our differences frame our
approach. We must instead focus on common ground and
inclusive approaches.
Your valuable outreach across regions, Mr Chairman, has
highlighted the Treaty’s enduring relevance to global peace and
security. We look forward to working with you to maximise
progress at this important Preparatory Committee session
midway through the 2020 review cycle.
Mr Chairman
Australia remains a proud and active participant in two broad
cross-regional groups of states working to promote and 
2
strengthen the NPT, including through advocacy of the 2010 NPT
Action Plan: the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI) and the Vienna Group of 10. These groupings continue to
illustrate that diversity across states is an asset which need not
impede progress towards shared goals. This is a valuable lesson
as we commence this meeting’s work.
Improving transparency on the implementation of NPT
commitments is one area of focus which would benefit all three
NPT pillars, especially disarmament, and we commend the NPDI
working paper on this issue.
Another cross-cutting area which warrants renewed attention is
strengthening the NPT review process. How can we best ensure
that our review efforts are effectively and efficiently focused so as
to optimise substantive outcomes? We look forward to working
with partners on advancing this important agenda.
In this respect, we are happy to see the awareness of the need of
gender perspectives and equal representation increasing within
the NPT, and the disarmament and non-proliferation field in
general. I hope that everyone wondering to themselves what
gender has to do with the NPT will join us at Wednesday’s
breakfast meeting, hosted by Australia, Canada, the Netherlands
and Sweden.
Mr Chairman
In relation to the NPT’s disarmament pillar, Australia maintains
its strong and long-standing commitment to the elimination of
nuclear weapons, an objective shared by all NPT states parties.
3
Australia is realistic about the challenges of achieving significant
disarmament in today’s environment. But there are practical
steps we can and should take now to help build trust, to bring
countries together to build a stronger basis for future progress.
Non-nuclear weapon states can play an important role in
building trust, fostering dialogues and engaging in cooperative
initiatives with each other and with nuclear weapon states.
But we urge nuclear weapons states themselves to take the lead
in demonstrating concrete results on nuclear disarmament. The
current focus could usefully be on strategic stability, deescalation
and risk reduction, laying the ground for future
reductions in nuclear weapon holdings. We were pleased with
the useful exchanges on nuclear risk reduction in the UN
Disarmament Commission which completed its first year of the
new cycle last week. As Chair of the UNDC, we think an outcome
on risk reduction would be a positive contribution to the 2020
NPT Review Conference.
One of the best ways to build trust for future disarmament is for
nuclear weapons states and non-nuclear weapons states to work
together.
For example, detailed work on elements for a future Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty will make a substantive contribution to
future negotiations.
Likewise, serious work on nuclear disarmament verification is
essential. 
4
Mr Chairman
Turning now to the NPT’s non-proliferation pillar, preventing
nuclear proliferation is as important now as it was when the NPT
was concluded. The Treaty – and the confidence and assurances
it delivers – can never be taken for granted. New efforts are
necessary to seek practical ways to build the confidence and
trust that is also necessary to underpin non-proliferation
assurances.
Key contemporary proliferation challenges include the DPRK and
Iran.
The DPRK’s development of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles, and its proliferation of sensitive technologies, form
an unacceptable challenge to the nuclear non-proliferation
framework.
In relation to Iran, in our view it is in the interests of the
international community for all parties to adhere to their
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Program of Action
(JCPOA). The JCPOA remains the best available mechanism to
assure the international community of Iran’s commitment to
conducting an entirely peaceful nuclear program.
We must ensure that safeguards regimes remain strong, trusted
and appropriately resourced. Australia continues to offer its
strong support to the crucial safeguards work of the IAEA, as well
as the importance of all states concluding the IAEA Additional
Protocol.
5
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is a
fundamental element of the nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament architecture and we note the continuing
importance of making substantive progress in working towards
and supporting entry into force of the CTBT. We look forward to
commencing a conversation on provisional application of
substantive CTBT provisions with states parties.
In another WMD context, the abhorrent recent use of chemical
weapons in Syria, Malaysia and the UK has underlined the need
for vigilance on compliance with treaty obligations and
accountability for violation of international laws.
Mr Chairman
The promise of the NPT’s pillar on the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy is evident from its relevance to no fewer than nine of the
17 Sustainable Development Goals.
We look forward to continuing to collaborate in this and other
forums on a range of initiatives to ensure that non-nuclear
weapon states continue to reap the benefits of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Given our shared interests in this cornerstone treaty, let’s seize
the opportunity offered by this meeting to address challenges
facing the NPT, and maintain and extend its extraordinary
benefits.
Thank you Mr Chairman.
6