
Mr. Chairman, Your Excellencies,
I would like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, on your election to preside over this Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. I have no doubt that your dedicated and able leadership and experience will provide valuable guidance to ensure a fruitful and productive outcome to our deliberations. At the outset, we would like to associate ourselves with the statement delivered by the representative of Syria on behalf of the Arab Group.
Mr. Chairman,
The preparatory work for the 2010 Review Conference should, without doubt, embody the pledges of both the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences, in which State parties agreed to extend the NPT indefinitely and to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

These decisions, Mr. Chairman, embody the very parameters of our work towards ensuring a successful outcome to the 2010 NPT Review Conference in renewing and reaffirming the commitment of NPT states to disarmament and non-proliferation, objectives which are more relevant and essential today than ever.
Mr. Chairman,
The Kingdom of Bahrain, Party to the NPT since 1988, as well as the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty since 2004, has long been committed to the principles of the non-proliferation and disarmament regime, and views the NPT as the core of this international framework.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of Bahrain has become a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and has concluded a Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, through its conviction of the important role played by the Agency in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Today, Bahrain looks forward to contributing effectively, and to working together with other State parties to achieve our shared goals in using nuclear power while ensuring peace, health, development and prosperity for all.
Among the most serious of the current dangers threatening the non-proliferation regime is the lack of universality. There is therefore a pressing need to take the steps and measures necessary to ensure the accession of States that are not yet party to the Treaty, and to do so without delay, in order to strengthen the universality and effectiveness of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
Bahrain is particularly concerned by the possible spread of nuclear weapons to the Middle East. The existence of such weapons in the region would create a seriously destabilizing factor, threatening both the countries and peoples of the region as well as the rest of the world.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, prompted by its firm belief in the importance of maintaining security and stability in the region, has supported all initiatives to build confidence and to create zones free of nuclear weapons, encompassing all countries of the region. These measures have included the creation of a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear weapons, in accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions.
In this regard, Mr. Chairman, I refer to the recently adopted General Assembly resolution A/62/56 of December 2007, in which the Assembly reaffirmed the importance of accession to the Treaty by Israel, the only State in the Middle East that has not yet become a party, and the placing of all its nuclear facilities and materials under comprehensive IAEA safeguards, in order to achieve universality of the Treaty in the Middle East Region. It is the Kingdom's firm belief that such accession, coupled
with a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East, will enhance peace

and security in the region and avoid a regional nuclear arms race. Mr. Chairman,
Bahrain reaffirms the right of all states to utilize nuclear power for peaceful purposes within the parameters of international standards and the provisions of the NPT, based on full openness and transparency with regard to nuclear programmes.

While recognizing and underlining this right, Bahrain again urges all concerned parties to improve transparency and to cooperate fully, in accordance with the NPT and other international instruments, with regard to nuclear programmes, so as to build confidence among states.
Further, Bahrain calls on all countries to live up to their NPT obligations, and to cooperate fully with the IAEA and the international community on nuclear issues and in particular on the inspection of nuclear programmes. Such measures can only enhance international trust, to the benefit of all concerned.
Mr. Chairman,
Finally, may I reaffirm the Kingdom of Bahrain's full support for the aims and objectives of the NPT. Bahrain hopes that the deliberations of this preparatory Session will ultimately pave the way towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons which would make this world a safer place for all mankind.
Thank you.
