
Mr. President,
On behalf of Belarus delegation let me congratulate you upon your election and express our confidence that under your able guidance the 2000 Review Conference will be steered to a success. I wish to assure you of the Belarus delegation's cooperation and support. 
Mr. President,
International community cannot ignore the alarming symptoms both in functioning of the nonproliferation regime itself and external factors influencing decision-making in the field of the international security. 
The recent developments in this field in the five last years of the outgoing millennium have raised great concerns. Nuclear tests in South Asia, the lack or denial of ratification of CTBT in the states crucial for the Treaty, including the US, continued non-accession to the NPT by a number of countries, whose participation is necessary for its universality - all these factors demand most sober evaluation from the global security perspective. 
At the same time, nine new states' joining the Treaty after 1995 Review Conference, consistent compliance by the nuclear States with the moratorium on nuclear testing, and finally the recent ratification of START II and CTBT by the Russian Federation comprise another, hopeful part of the nuclear nonproliferation picture. 
Republic of Belarus strongly believes that NPT, notwithstanding its shortcomings, remains the fundamental basis of the international security. Its erosion is an erosion of the whole planetary security system. Challenges to non-proliferation regime demand that we, its participants, display a new level of responsibility in our individual and collective decisions. 
Let me announce that two days ago, April 25, 2000, the ratification of CTBT was completed by both chambers of Belarus' parliament. This step reiterates strong and consistent adherence of Belarus to its responsibility in ensuring nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, maintaining international peace and security. 
In view of the fact that this Conference is the first high-level review after the indefinite extension of NPT in 1995, we are tasked to find adequate responses to the challenges presented by the realities with a view to preserve and strengthen nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
Above all, it is necessary to achieve progress in NPT universality, in particular, through immediate accession to the Treaty of states which possess IAEA in safeguarded nuclear facilities. At the same time full-scope efforts towards non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices should not stand in the way of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, accordingly, providing fair and equal access for all countries to the achievements in this field. 
As is well known, Belarus was the first country which unconditionally relinquished the nuclear weapons inherited from the Soviet Union and completed their withdrawal from its territory in 1997. That is why we strongly believe in the just necessity of providing legally binding security assurances to non-nuclear states. Renouncing nuclear option must be compensated by precisely such type guarantees. We are also convinced that a prohibition of the production of fissile material for weapons purposes is needed, and we would like to express our concern regarding the lack of progress on this issue at the Conference of Disarmament. 
Belarus along with the majority of states supports unconditionally the overall goal of elimination of nuclear weapons. We should follow a realistic and consecutive approach, which will bring the international community to a nuclear-weapon-free world. 
Our delegation expresses its deep concern with regard to the plans for deploying national missile defense system in contravention to the ABM Treaty. We have no doubt that such development will undermine the existing nuclear non-proliferation regime and gravely affect the strategic stability system which was created throughout decades. As is well known Belarus jointly with Russia and China cosponsored the resolution on ABM at the 54th UNGA session. We will continue to take a most active stand to preserve the Treaty and compliance thereof, both as a participant of the five-lateral process on the ABM Treaty and as a responsible member of the United Nations. 
Belarus believes that under the current conditions the role of NWFZ for nuclear non-proliferation regime has profoundly increased. We welcome signing and implementation of the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, progress in creating a similar zone in Central Asia, proclamation of a nuclear-free status of Mongolia. These measures seriously limit the scope of possible spread of nuclear weapons, promote trust, openness and transparency between states of the region. 
Proceeding from its contribution to and responsibility for nuclear disarmament Belarus continues to consider the idea of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free space in Central and Eastern Europe, which was supported by the UN General Assembly, as essential and productive. We do not close our eyes on current attitudes towards this proposal within the region. Nevertheless Belarus appeals to secure the current de-facto non-nuclear status of this region on the basis of existing obligations related to nuclear non-proliferation and in accordance with multilateral and bilateral agreements. This concept does not infringe upon anybody's interests. On the contrary, it strengthens security and stability in the European region and through that global security and stability. We do believe that time will come when momentary political objections to this concept will be shed and the idea will become a reality. Belarus is open to cooperation on this issue with the states of the region and with any other countries. We appreciate the support to this idea expressed here at the Conference. 
We would like also to support efforts of all countries of the Middle East for establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region and express our hope for the earliest conclusion of an agreement to establish a first ever zone free of all weapons of mass destruction. In this regard we call for all the states of the region to join the Treaty and put their nuclear facilities under full-scope IAEA safeguards. 
As to progress of IAEA safeguards we would like to stress that increasing their effectiveness and universality was provided for by the 1995 Review Conference documents. We welcome the efforts of the IAEA Secretariat towards providing the broadest signing of the Additional Protocol, which is an effective method of detecting covert nuclear weapon programs. For its part, Belarus has proclaimed its readiness to begin consultations with IAEA Secretariat on a draft of the Additional Protocol for the Agreement between IAEA and Belarus on safeguards. Belarus voluntary complies with a part of its provisions. 
Belarus strongly adheres to the full implementation of Article IV on cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Despite a significant progress achieved in insuring nuclear safety, the international community should not afford any complacency in this issue. The fate of Belarus, Ukraine and Russia continuing to suffer from the pre-Chernobyl complacency, must alert all. It is most appropriate to remind of that today: exactly 14 years ago this day became for the Chernobyl victims "the day after" which will last for ages. 
An analysis of causes of practically all nuclear plants emergency situations brings us to a conclusion that the human error factor remains "the weakest chain link" in ensuring nuclear safety. Issues of processing and disposal of spent nuclear fuel, as well as decommissioning of nuclear plants are also extremely acute today. 
Concluding my statement, I would like to express a hope that the Conference will be able to find a right balance between national interests and the destiny of the united nations.
Thank you, Mr. President. 

