KINGDOM OF BELGIUM
STATEMENT BY H.E. M. WERNER BAUWENS, SPECIAL ENVOY FOR
DISARMAMENT AND NON-PROLIFERATION
SECOND PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW
CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA, 23 APRIL 2013
Mr. Chairman,
Dear Colleagues,
Belgium shares the vision of a world without nuclear weapons. This is a long term vision
that can become reality only if all nuclear weapon states commit themselves to a process
of concrete, irreversible and verifiable policy changes and reductions and if the NonProliferation
Treaty is truly universal and fully respected. Disarmament and nonproliferation
go hand in hand and progress in both areas must contribute to international
peace and security. For this reason, we should not limit ourselves to pious wishes or get
distracted by lofty declarations. What is needed is a thorough and constant reality check.
What is happening on the ground? What is the full picture, including the root causes of
conflict and lack of trust? What is each party’s level of responsibility? This conference
offers an ideal opportunity to address these questions and to evaluate the implementation
of our 2010 NPT action plan.
Mr. Chairman,
Belgium calls once more on India, Israel and Pakistan to join the NPT as non nuclear
weapon states. We recognize that such decision requires considerable political courage
and cannot be dissociated from the regional context. Our role should be supportive and
constructive. We should not miss an opportunity to engage with these countries in a way
that is compatible with our own NPT allegiance. We should make the best out of our
relationships with them in areas such as nuclear security, export control, IAEA
verification and safe and responsible nuclear management. But we should also invest in
promoting regional stability and broader confidence building.
The convening of a conference on the creation of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, to be attended by all States of the 
region, would have a tremendous bridge building function. We call on all parties
concerned to show flexibility and trust in the Facilitator.
We will not achieve universality of the NPT if we ourselves create doubts about its
centrality and relevance. The treaty is as much a set of balanced norms and commitments
as it is a process of questions and answers aimed at raising the level of implementation in
the context of ever changing realities. Any scenario of a State intent to leave the NPT
would be a system failure, as the case of the DPRK illustrates. We see merit in clarifying
the rules concerning withdrawal and welcome the useful papers that have been circulated.
Mr. Chairman,
Action 1 of our 2010 Review Conference conclusions commits all States parties to pursue
policies that are fully compatible with the Treaty and the objective of achieving a world
without nuclear weapons. Belgium welcomes the continued progress made in the
implementation of the new START treaty between the United States and the Russian
Federation. We salute President Obama’s recent call to further deepen these reductions
and to include in the negotiating process all types of nuclear weapons, deployed and nondeployed,
strategic and non-strategic. This corresponds to the position my country has
promoted consistently and we will support it in every possible way in the fora to which
we belong. As a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Belgium participated
actively in the elaboration of the new strategic concept and the defense and deterrence
posture review. We have managed to further reduce the role and numbers of nuclear
weapons in NATO’s defense, confirmed the de-targeting and de-alerting status of the few
remaining nuclear components, created an opening for effective negative security
assurances and nuclear weapon free zones and promoted increased transparency and
nuclear confidence building measures. The newly created NATO Arms Control,
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Committee is now working on this basis and will
facilitate the translation of policy principles into concrete actions. The NATO-Russia
Council provides another opportunity to register progress. My country will be actively
promoting increased transparency, accountability and confidence building measures, such
as mutual visits and joint doctrine analysis. Inspired by the transparency regarding
nuclear holdings already shown by some, we encourage all nuclear weapon states to fully
report to the 2014 NPT Preparatory Committee, in accordance with Actions 5 and 21 of
the NPT Action Plan. Belgium is convinced that the total elimination of nuclear weapons
cannot forego the requirements of transparency, accountability, verifiability and
irreversibility. Moreover, our vision of a nuclear weapon free world is based on the entry
into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the conclusion of a Treaty banning
the production of new Fissile Material. We call on all States concerned to commit
themselves to ratification of the CTBT, to the commencement of FMCT negotiations and
to the reactivation of the Conference on Disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
The essential role of the IAEA in providing the international community with credible
guarantees about the exclusively peaceful nature of nuclear programs is widely
supported. Full scope safeguards agreements in combination with an additional protocol 
constitute the current verification standard. We call on all States to live up to this
standard. This is all the more so for countries whose nuclear activities give rise to serious
concern. These countries have everything to gain from full transparency and cooperation
with the IAEA.
We urge Iran to uphold its commitments under the UN Charter and the NPT and to
respond positively and without further delay to the IAEA requests. Iran’s past and present
nuclear activities, as documented by the IAEA, raise serious concern in the wide
international community and stand in the way of normal and constructive relations, as
illustrated by the far reaching sanctions in place. We expect Iran to dispel the mistrust it
has created by engaging in clandestine and dubious activities. Restoring confidence is at
the heart of the diplomatic process carried out on our behalf by the EU High
Representative and we urge Iran to respond seriously and timely to the offer put on the
table by the E3+3.
The DPRK has moved one step further in defying the international community. We
strongly condemn the nuclear test carried out by the DPRK last February and the
provocative and aggressive rhetoric. Nuclear blackmail cannot be tolerated. The DPRK
leadership knows what is has to do if it really wants to sync in with the 21st century and
give to its people the dignity and prosperity all human beings deserve. What is required,
is full compliance with the NPT and IAEA safeguards obligations, UN Security Council
resolutions and commitments made in the Six Party Talks.
Mr. Chairman,
Peaceful use of the atom is a matter of interest to all of us, regardless of the national
decisions taken by some regarding nuclear energy. Safety and security are challenges that
will not wither away. Following the Fukushima Daichi accident, we have gone through
extensive nuclear stress tests and we are fully engaged in translating the results in
concrete safety actions. Last January, Belgium deposited with the IAEA its ratification
instrument regarding the Amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. In the context of our participation in the Nuclear Security Summit, we have
committed ourselves to the conversion of High Enriched Uranium to Low Enriched
Uranium, when technically and economically feasible. This complex process is well
underway, while we continue at the same time to guarantee the production of medical
radioisotopes, an essential contribution to human healthcare worldwide. Our nuclear
research centre SCK continues to develop the innovative reactor project MYRRHA,
which combines benefits in terms of security, non proliferation and nuclear waste
management. Our research centre also remains an active provider of training services to
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Program. In these times of severe budget constraints,
Belgium maintains the payment in full of all its contributions to the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
Belgium repeatedly expressed deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and reaffirmed the need for all States at all 
times to comply with applicable international law, including international humanitarian
law, while convinced that every effort should be made to avoid nuclear war and nuclear
terrorism. Belgium promotes, in cooperation with civil society, disarmament and nonproliferation
education which, inter alia, contributes to raising public awareness of the
tragic consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. This brings us back to the need to
underscore the centrality of the NPT, which remains the cornerstone of the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime, the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament
in accordance with Article VI of the Treaty and an important element in the further
development of nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes. The three reinforcing
pillars of the NPT constitute a unique, balanced and irreplaceable framework to avoid
nuclear catastrophe. We must uphold the NPT and not get distracted from it. Under your
able leadership, Mr. Chairman, we will be able to accomplish this mission. Belgium fully
associates itself with the statement made by the European Union. We look forward to
interactive discussions and a successful outcome of this Preparatory Committee.
Thank you for your attention. 