II PrepCom to the 2020 NPT RevCon - General Debate
Intervention from Brazil
"Mr. Chairman,
Let me first congratulate you on assuming the chairmanship of this
Preparatory Committee. Be assured of the full support of the
Brazilian delegation to your endeavors. Brazil fully associates itself
with the statement delivered by New Zealand, on behalf of the New
Agenda Coalition.
This Preparatory Committee has a singular role to play in the current
NPT Review Cycle. It has the responsibility to ensure continuity from
the discussion held last year while also preparing the ground for the
next PrepCom and the Review Conference itself. This delicate job is
further complicated, alas, by the particular circumstances in which
we meet. There have been glimmers of hope, particularly with the
adoption and opening for signature of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons; the completion of arsenal reductions under New
START by the US and Russia; and the resumption of dialogue on the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. However, we have also
witnessed a general degradation of international security and of the
relations between Nuclear Weapons States, accompanied by
troubling signs of a renewed, and in our view profoundly misguided,
reliance on nuclear weapons and related deterrence doctrines.
Mr. Chair,
The warnings against the modernization of nuclear weapons which
my delegation, among many others, has been constantly issuing in
the past few years, not only in the context of the NPT, but also in
other fora, particularly the CTBT Article XIV Conferences, prove now
prophetic. There is a widespread concern that a new arms race is
already under way, and Nuclear Weapon States are openly
developing new nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles as well as
new missions for such weapons. Those developments directly
contradict commitments agreed to under the NPT, call into question
their sincerity in pursuing the implementation of Article VI and
undermine the Treaty and its three pillars alike.
This new arms race seems to be based on the convergence of new
technologies with the traditional concept of nuclear deterrence. This 
is an unproven and potentially disastrous mix. The blurring of lines
between conventional and nuclear, tactical and strategic, and kinetic
and non-kinetic means of attack, particularly the use of cybertools,
challenge conventional wisdom on nuclear weapons and introduce
elements of uncertainty in a realm where there is no margin for error.
The heightening in rhetoric accompanying this trend adds to our
concerns, as political brinksmanship meets strategic recklessness.
Mr. Chair,
The treaty has been moderately successful in preventing
proliferation, and there is only one case of withdrawal in the Treaty's
history. Additionally, the international system has been able to deal
with particular challenges which have arisen. In this sense, we are
particularly worried with signs that there is a possibility of reneging
the commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on
the Iranian nuclear dossier. The JCPOA was approved by the UN
Security Council and its implementation has been consistently
certified by the IAEA. Its unravelling would in our view directly affect
the credibility of the multilateral system and instill doubts on its
effectivity. We are also concerned that the possible accession of
non-NPT countries in the NSG may happen with detriment to the
integrity of the NPT-based regime, without agreed criteria and on a
case-by-case basis. Such a haphazard attitude towards these crucial
issues could bode ill for the non-proliferation regime moving forward,
as it defies the fundamental notion of a rules-based system.
Mr. Chair,
It is against this backdrop that we must step up our efforts to protect
and sustain the NPT, and the only way to do it is by fully complying
with its obligations. Let me stress, in this vein, that Brazil and
Argentina have jointly built a unique relationship of cooperation and
mutual trust, underpinned by the work of the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Material (ABACC). We
must reiterate the commitments unanimously agreed to in 1995,
2000 and 2010, and stress the urgency of their implementation for
the health of the regime. Those include the urgent entry into force of
the CTBT, the negotiation of a treaty on fissile materials, diminishing
the salience of nuclear weapons in military doctrines, further arsenal
reductions, the unimpeded access to nuclear energy for peaceful
uses and the establishment of a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and
all Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East. The NPT 
acquis is a fundamental part of the global peace and security
architecture, it is our collective responsibility to reaffirm it and build
upon it, towards a successful 2020 Review Conference and the
realization of the objective of a world free of nuclear weapons. We
cannot wait on signals from the outside to move ahead, rather, we
must respond to current challenges with renewed energy and focus.
I thank you Mr. Chair." 
