Mr Chairman.
Let me begin by saying that it is a pleasure to have you on the chair. Your vast experience may well be a beacon on the work of this PrepCom.
Brazil is fully aligned with the statement made by Mexico on behalf of ne New Agenda Coalition.
Mr Chairman,
Multilateralism came to face growing challenges in the first few years of the third millcnium. Old and new risks brought new challenges to the hopes for nuclear disarmament and to the regime of non-proliferation: at the same time, unresolved issues still give reason for deep concern. The 2005 Review Conference of the NPT. including its Prepeoms. cannot be .seen in isolation from recent developments in the Held of non-proliferation and disarmament, which include a complex range of issues. Failure to consider in depth the implications of these issues may jeopardize the success of the NPT review process.
Disturbing signals of non-compliance and lack of commitment to the non-proliferation obligations in the Treaty are without a shadow of a doubt major problems. Recent revelations of the existence of a global black market network of nuclear material underline the stark danger facing the international community.
Side by side with these new issues, however, we must address with renew et. vigour, within the framework of the NPT. the long-standing nuclear challenges which remain in place, lest the whole review process become irrelevant.
There is no doubt that all articles of the Treat} are binding for all States-Parties at all times. Noncompliance with the Treaty obligations therefore is intrinsically linked to every article and commitment of the Treaty. Wc fully support that PrepCom 111 has to address the problem of NPT noncompliance and consider ways to ensure th.it states continue to adhere to their Treaty obligations.
Mr Chairman.
The existing regime of non-proliferation, the centerpiece of which is the NPT, rests on a delicate balance of rights and obligations. The overwhelming majority of the world
community decided that they were willing to forgo their sovereign righi to the luclear military option in exchange lor a general expression of support for the objective of overall nuclear disarmament and a commitment to "seek to achieve" "in good faith" that objective, on the part of those few who had already acquired a nuclear military capability.
Moreover, the Treaty recognized the inalienable right of all parties to develop the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and provided for incentives in the form of technical cooperation for peaceful purposes; non-nuclear-weapon Parties agreed to place heir nuclear activities under a mandatory set of safeguards designed to prevent the diversion of material for illicit purposes, while the nuclear-weapon Parties are not encumbered bv similar obligations regarding their military programs.
The main imbalance thus resides in the fact that pending effective measures of nuclear disarmament, the nuclear-weapon Parties were allowed to retain, albeit temporarily, their research activities and their arsenals. This does not mean that the NPT should be considered as a sort of Charter that would legitimize the continuing possession of nuclear weapons. In our view, the expression "non-proliferation" contained in the Preamble is meant to apply both to the horizontal and the vertical aspect of proliferation
Mr Chairman.
The preparatory process of the 2005 Review Conference, and tor that matter the Conference itself, provide the membership of the NPT with an opportunity to .est the willingness of all parties to live up to their commitments and to the expectations th.w have generated. The strength, credibility and permanence of the NPT rests on a fundamental bargain which must be recognized and upheld if we want the Treaty to be effective and lasting by virtue of its own merits.
PrepCom II] is called upon to make every effort lo forward consensus recommendations for the Review Conference. We wish the procedure discussions tor the RevCon may be finalized at the PrepCom so that constructive substantive discussions may be held throughout the next two weeks.
In sum. meaningful, action-oriented consensus at the 2005 NPT Review Cor Terence to deal with the unprecedented challenges of our time will depend primarily on the ability to keep the original bargain of the Treat}" alive and functional. Success will not be measured by the level of agreement on procedure, but by the political will to achieve balanced results. Little can we hope to achieve without a balance between a substantive focus on nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - the three fundamental pillars on which the credibility and sustainability of the NPT ultimately rest.-