BRAZIL
Statement by H.E. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 28 April 2015
(Check against delivery)
Madam President,
I congratulate you on your election as president of this Ninth NPT Review
Conference. The Brazilian delegation places the highest confidence in your
leadership and pledges its full cooperation to achieve a successful outcome.
Brazil fully associates itself with the statements by New Zealand on behalf of the
New Agenda Coalition (NAC) and by Ecuador on behalf of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC).
Madam President,
This Conference closes the fourth strengthened review cycle of the NPT since the
1995 decision to extend the treaty indefinitely was adopted alongside the Middle
East resolution, the Declaration on Principles and Objectives and an enhanced
mechanism for reviewing the implementation of the treaty in all its aspects.
During the next four weeks, we will be assessing how successful we were in
advancing the Treaty's provisions in the last five years. For Brazil, the measure of
such success is inherently related to the fulfillment of the original NPT
compromise. The continuing implementation gap between non-proliferation and
disarmament obligations discredits the NPT bargain between nuclear weapons
States and non-nuclear weapons States and threatens to corrode the foundation
upon which the regime was built. 
2
The strengthened review system has led to the adoption of important
commitments, most notably the thirteen practical steps towards nuclear
disarmament, in 2000, and the adoption of the 2010 Action Plan. However,
implementation of these commitments has been poor, at best, including with
regard to the failure to convene the Conference on the establishment of a Middle
East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
Notwithstanding unilateral and bilateral arsenal reductions and increased
coordination among the nuclear weapons States, which we welcome, we are
concerned by a lack of real irreversible progress on disarmament. Attempts to
reinforce commitments on non-proliferation without previous concrete progress
on nuclear disarmament can only further erode the NPT edifice.
Arsenal reductions, especially when carried out in the context of modernization
programmes and vertical proliferation, do not equal nuclear disarmament. On the
contrary, in recent years, all information available on nuclear-weapons States
plans for their nuclear weapons programmes signal that there is no intention to
get rid of these weapons in the foreseeable future. Such actions run counter to the
commitment of the five nuclear-weapon States under Article VI of the NPT to
pursue negotiations in good faith on a Treaty on general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control – which the ICJ has
emphasized as a legal obligation in its landmark 1996 Advisory Opinion on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons.
While we acknowledge the improved dialogue between the nuclear-weapons
States and the increased, albeit insufficient, transparency with regards to their
nuclear arsenals, it is important to stress that neither dialogue nor transparency
measures are ends in themselves, but means to fulfill concrete disarmament
objectives. Improved transparency and dialogue should lead to negotiations,
otherwise they will become irrelevant.
Madam President,
It is clear that the so-called "step-by-step" approach advocated by nuclear
weapons States has failed to deliver on initial expectations. The Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty was finalized almost twenty years ago and is not yet in force. The
beginning of negotiations on a fissile material treaty has been stalled for over a
decade.
The international community finds itself in a stalemate akin to Zeno's paradox. The
ancient Greek philosopher claimed that movement was impossible, because before
walking a certain distance, first one would have to walk half that distance, and
before that, a quarter, and so on indefinitely. To achieve progress in nuclear
disarmament within the "step-by-step" approach, conversely, the international
community has been told that, before taking any first step, we should take half the
first step, and before that, half of half a step, and so on. We know for a fact,
however, that movement is possible. We know that, if there is political will, real
and meaningful progress in nuclear disarmament is also possible. It is indeed
necessary.
3
Madam President,
The reemergence of the humanitarian approach to nuclear disarmament has
brought renewed energy to the debate on nuclear weapons, highlighting the
catastrophic consequences that would ensue from the use, either intentional or by
accident, of such weapons and their incompatibility with international
humanitarian law. It has also helped us to reflect further on the absurdity of
advocating nuclear non-proliferation while at the same time continuously praising
nuclear weapons as indispensable to guarantee one's security, as well as on the
perversity of diverting huge amounts of money and resources to the maintenance
and modernization of nuclear arsenals.
As the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impacts of Nuclear Weapons have
emphasized, nuclear weapons have long-lasting, devastating, indiscriminate
effects, affecting civilians foremost. Their impacts on human health and the
environment last generations and there is no country or organization capable of
responding to the humanitarian disaster ensuing from a nuclear detonation. The
elimination of nuclear weapons is, therefore, not only a legal obligation, but also an
ethical imperative.
Beyond the fears instilled by the possibility of a detonation, the mere existence of
nuclear weapons has a huge impact on peoples' lives. The financial resources
diverted to the maintenance and modernization of nuclear arsenals could, if
invested elsewhere, provide significant betterment of living conditions worldwide.
Even amidst a fragile economic situation and in a context of dwindling resources to
alleviate poverty and promote development, it is estimated that the nuclearweapon
States spend around 100 billion dollars a year to maintain their arsenals.
This is a disturbing sign of how global priorities are being set, and shows that there
is also a socioeconomic imperative for nuclear disarmament.
Furthermore, there is also the security imperative. The continued existence of
nuclear weapons and the threat to humankind they represent increase tensions in
all regions of the world, foster suspicion and hinder cooperation between States.
Nuclear weapons and doctrines of nuclear deterrence make the world more
dangerous and more unstable, unintendedly inviting proliferation, for every State
in the world may likewise argue its security can only be assured by the possession
of nuclear weapons. Nuclear disarmament is thus the only credible way to
consolidate the non-proliferation regime.
Brazil believes that the positive momentum stemming from the Oslo, Nayarit and
Vienna Conferences will have an impact on nuclear disarmament both at this
Conference and in multilateral fora dealing with disarmament.
There is a need to see light at the end of the tunnel. A timeframe, however flexible,
will be a significant contribution to upholding the credibility of the NPT regime.
Brazil believes a time horizon for nuclear disarmament must eventually take the
form of a comprehensive Convention on nuclear weapons. While this should be a
priority, we do not discard other options that are currently being brought to the
table. Recently, in the context of the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impacts, we 
4
have associated ourselves with other countries seeking to fill the legal gap for the
prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons. Although Brazil sees the CD as the
most appropriate forum for these negotiations, given the current stalemate in that
body, we would not object any negotiating process that could take place within the
United Nations framework, as in the UN General Assembly.
It is high time to challenge the worn-out notion that one must wait for all stars to
align in order to move ahead with nuclear disarmament. In fact, the opposite is
true. Only decisive action towards the fulfillment of nuclear disarmament
commitments can bring about the conditions for a more stable and less dangerous
world.
Madam President,
Despite the priority we attach to the launching of multilateral negotiations on a
comprehensive nuclear disarmament convention, relevant interim and supporting
measures should continue to be actively pursued in all disarmament fora.
Of these measures, perhaps the most urgent is the entry into force of the CTBT. It is
inconceivable that, 19 years after the end of negotiations, there is still no prospect
for its entry into force. Brazil would like to urge once again all countries that have
not acceded to the CTBT, in particular Annex II countries, to do so as a matter of
urgency and refrain from any action that would undermine the Treaty's objectives,
in particular those related to the modernization of nuclear arsenals, including
subcritical or non-explosive tests. In our view, such activities run counter to the
object and purpose of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), its
spirit, if not the letter.
Also central to attain effective progress on nuclear disarmament is a review of the
nuclear-weapons State's strategic reliance on nuclear weapons. Doctrines of
nuclear deterrence currently espoused by the nuclear-weapon States expressly
contradict their commitments to the complete elimination of their nuclear
arsenals. The nuclear-weapon States must urgently carry a thorough review of the
role of nuclear weapons in their security policies and military doctrines, in order to
diminish and ultimately eliminate reliance on nuclear weapons.
Madam President,
Achieving consensus on the CD's programme of work, which must include the core
issues of its agenda, should also be a priority. Brazil attaches great importance to
the CD as the world's single negotiating body specially dedicated to disarmament.
It is my country's view that current declaratory policies from nuclear weapons
States regarding the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear
weapons States are utterly inadequate. Those assurances are not legally binding
and can be changed any time. We therefore urge the CD to launch immediate
negotiations on a legally binding instrument on negative security assurances. 
5
With regard to a fissile material treaty, it is our view that, in order for such an
instrument to be meaningful, it must deal in one way or another with the issue of
current stockpiles. As we all know, there is sufficient nuclear material to continue
the production of nuclear weapons for centuries to come, which is hardly a good
prospect in terms of nuclear disarmament. In this sense, we welcome the work of
the Group of Governmental Experts on the matter and hope the Group's final
report may contribute to finally unlock the negotiations of an FMT.
The reasons for the stalemate at the CD are political and therefore cannot be
ascribed to institutional or procedural issues. In order to better reflect current
international realities, however, Brazil believes the CD calls for an update in terms
of membership, of rules of procedure and of participation of civil society. Brazil is
convinced that these issues must be reviewed, but any reform effort should
consider the United Nations disarmament machinery as a whole, including the
UNDC and its inability to present recommendations in the past few years. This is
why we support the convening of a fourth special session of the General Assembly
on Disarmament (SSOD-IV), which can scrutinize the institutional framework
erected by its first predecessor, in 1978.
Madam President,
As a country unequivocally committed to the integrity of the NPT and to the
credibility of the review mechanism, we cannot but also voice our frustration with
the failure, so far, to convene a Conference on the Establishment of a Zone Free of
Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Middle East as
provided for by the 2010 NPT Action Plan. We must bear in mind that this issue
was part of the bargain which allowed the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995.
Positive developments in the region, even amidst serious crisis, such as Syria's
accession to the CWC – and the ongoing dismantling of its chemical weapons – and,
most recently, the progress in negotiations regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme could contribute to holding the Conference as soon as possible. It is
our firm hope that the successful convening of the Conference would provide an
invaluable framework for confidence-building and cooperation among the States of
the region and represent an important step towards greater stability in the Middle
East.
The establishment and maintenance of nuclear-weapon-free zones enhances
global and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
As a member of the first treaty to establish a denuclearized zone in a densely
populated area, the Treaty of Tlatelolco, Brazil took part in the third Conference of
States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapons Free
Zones and Mongolia, held here in New York on 24 April 2015, to advance efforts
leading to the establishment and strengthening of nuclear-weapon-free zones
around the world.
Brazil developed, together with Argentina, a successful model of regional
cooperation and confidence-building represented by the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Material (ABACC). The Agency could 
6
serve as a source of inspiration for our partners in the Middle East and elsewhere
that strive for the establishment of zones free from nuclear weapons.
It is essential that the nuclear weapons States be fully committed to the integrity of
nuclear-weapon-free zones. We therefore urge those States to withdraw, with
immediate effect, any reservations or interpretative declarations to the relevant
protocols to treaties that establish nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Madam President,
In order to preserve the credibility of the NPT's Review Process, this Conference
has a special responsibility regarding the disarmament pillar. Merely rolling-over
the commitments already agreed to, and so poorly implemented, is not an option.
The Conference must deepen the current commitments, propose new concrete
ones and demand from the nuclear-weapons States how – and when – they will be
met. A tentative roadmap towards nuclear disarmament, whereby the NPT States
would outline their views on a timeframe for nuclear disarmament, could provide
an important benchmark for future progress and for the negotiations on a
comprehensive convention to completely eliminate nuclear weapons.
Madam President,
Non-proliferation has undoubtedly been the most successful of the three pillars of
the NPT. With one exception, none of the 186 States that have become parties to
the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States has since built or acquired a nuclear
weapon or a nuclear explosive device. Forty-four years after the Treaty's entry into
force, the non-nuclear-weapon States have been complying with their obligations
under the Treaty and keeping their end of the fundamental bargain at its core, in
stark contrast to the implementation of the disarmament commitments under
Article VI by the nuclear-weapon States.
Such success, however, gives no grounds for complacency. Brazil is therefore fully
supportive of multilateral efforts aimed at preserving and ensuring compliance
with the NPT non-proliferation obligations, notably through the IAEA.
Brazil remains supportive of IAEA efforts to promote more efficient and effective
safeguards, in strict accordance with the relevant legal instruments entered into by
Member States with the Agency, and taking into account the necessary distinction
between legal obligations and voluntary commitments, such as the Additional
Protocol.
Madam President,
Brazil joined others in the IAEA General Conference's request in 2012 for the
Secretariat to report on the development of new approaches for safeguards
implementation through the so-called "State-level Concept" (SLC).
In its 2014 Resolution on "Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the
Efficiency of Agency Safeguards", the General Conference welcomed, with Brazil's 
7
support, information finally provided by the Secretariat by means of a
Supplementary Report.
The General Conference welcomed in particular the important assurances
contained in that report and in the statements made by the IAEA Director General
and the Secretariat as noted by the Board of Governors in its September 2014
session.
The General Conference also noted a point that Brazil strongly endorses: the
development and implementation of State-level approaches requires close
consultation and coordination with the State and/or regional authority, and
agreement by the State concerned on practical arrangements for effective
implementation of all safeguards measures identified for use in the field, if such
arrangements are not already in place.
The development of the Supplementary Document and the decisions by the
General Conference on the SLC resulted from an unprecedented process of
consultations and technical meetings between the Secretariat and Member States.
For Brazil, this process introduced a new and encouraging dynamic in how
safeguards issues should be dealt with within the IAEA.
The discussions have given room for greater accountability and transparency on
the part of the Secretariat, and for closer involvement of Member States in the
development of proposed new policies. The openness and transparency that have
characterized the exchanges between the Secretariat and Member States should be
continuing features of the ongoing and future treatment of safeguards within the
Agency.
Madam President,
Brazil has always maintained that there is no alternative to a diplomatic,
negotiated solution to the issues related to Iran's nuclear program. The
understanding between Iran and the P5+1 announced in Lausanne on 2 April was
a major step in that direction, and we wish once again to commend the parties for
their efforts. It is Brazil's hope that the ongoing negotiations will lead, in June, to a
permanent solution to the matter, which includes the recognition of Iran's
inalienable right to develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, consistent with its obligations under the NPT.
Brazil strongly condemned the nuclear tests carried out by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) in violation of its obligations under the relevant
UN Security Council resolutions. We urge the DPRK to fulfil its commitments under
the Six-Party Talks; to abandon all nuclear weapons programs; to return, without
delay, to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State and to place all its nuclear
facilities under IAEA verification, with a view to achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful manner.
8
Madam President,
For Brazil, no matter how tight one may desire to render the verification of
compliance with non-proliferation obligations, the key to upholding the integrity
of the NPT lies in reducing the incentives to proliferate. In this regard, the
continued reliance by some States or military alliances on nuclear weapons as the
ultimate "deterrent" - and thereby essential instruments of a State's security - is
probably the greatest threat to the integrity of the NPT. Such reliance may be
emulated by other States that feel threatened, and which may conclude that a
nuclear "deterrent" may indeed be indispensable for their survival.
Nuclear disarmament is therefore essential to nuclear non-proliferation. As long as
nuclear weapons exist, there will be States and non-State actors tempted to
acquire or develop them.
Brazil is firmly committed to the objective of nuclear non-proliferation. However,
any approach that focuses exclusively on this pillar, detached from necessary
progress on nuclear disarmament, is doomed to failure. It is high time for nuclearweapon
States to show coherence and stop raising security or any other reasons as
justification for the maintenance and modernization of their nuclear arsenals. This
argument only contributes to the erosion of the credibility of the nuclear nonproliferation
regime.
Brazil cannot accept that the burden of the NPT Regime continue to fall exclusively
on the non-nuclear-weapon States, with the increasing imposition of obligations
that affect only those who already faithfully comply with their Treaty obligations.
While Brazil fully respects the sovereign decision of those States that decided to
sign an Additional Protocol with the IAEA, we recall that the Model Additional
Protocol (INFCIRC/540) was approved by the Agency's Board of Governors on the
understanding of its voluntary nature, a fact that is officially reflected in that
body's records. The 2010 Final Document also recognized that "it is the sovereign
decision of any State to conclude an additional protocol". Furthermore, Action 30
of the 2010 Action Plan stated that "additional protocols should be universally
applied once the complete elimination of nuclear weapons has been achieved".
This language was incorporated into the Safeguards Resolution adopted by the
IAEA General Conference in 2014.
The verification standard under the NPT is clearly set out in Article III of the
Treaty: "safeguards, as set forth in an agreement to be negotiated and concluded
with the International Atomic Energy Agency in accordance with the Statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the Agency's safeguards system"; "nonnuclear-weapon
States Party to the Treaty shall conclude agreements with the
International Atomic Energy Agency to meet the requirements of this Article (...) in
accordance with the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Negotiation of such agreements shall commence within 180 days from the original
entry into force of this Treaty".
9
This language leaves no doubt that the verification standard pursuant to Article III
is that enshrined in the agreements that were to be negotiated with the IAEA
shortly after entry into force of the NPT.
Madam President,
Article IV of the NPT expressly recognizes "the inalienable right of all the Parties to
the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes". It also determines that States in a position to do so shall cooperate in
the "development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with
due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world."
Furthermore, the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear NonProliferation
and Disarmament" provides that "[in] all activities designed to
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, preferential treatment should be
given to the non-nuclear-weapon States party to the Treaty, taking the needs of
developing countries particularly into account."
Brazil places great importance on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. We
are fully convinced that nuclear technology will continue to be of great relevance
for the achievement of the MDGS, as well as for the post-2015 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). As highlighted in the outcome document of the Rio+20
Conference, sustainable development must be achieved in all its dimensions, with a
view to integrating the economic, social and environmental aspects. Nuclear
energy will certainly have an impact on these three areas, particularly when taking
into account that nuclear applications in health, nutrition, food, agriculture,
environment, industry and energy can contribute to the preservation of life,
eradication of poverty, improvement of health and education and productivity
gains. In this context, it is essential that all States be allowed to have access and
make use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Brazil welcomes the fact that
the IAEA has decided to take an active part in discussions on the post-2015
development agenda, including by providing inputs to the process of preparing for
the next Sustainable Development Goals. We believe that this Conference should
expressly endorse that decision by the IAEA.
Brazil attaches particular relevance to the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme, in which it is an active participant, as both beneficiary and donor
country.
Under the auspices of the Programme, Brazil sends some 50 technicians for
training abroad every year. Furthermore, it offers more than 40 scholarships for
nationals of Latin American and Caribbean, African, Middle East and Asian
countries to receive training at Brazilian institutions and facilities. Brazil also
makes available about 25 nuclear specialists every year to serve in the context of
IAEA expert missions abroad.
10
Madam President,
Building on an initiative by the IAEA Deputy Director-General for Technical
Cooperation, Brazil has increased its cooperation in the nuclear field with
Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa, in particular Angola and Mozambique,
focusing on areas such as licensing, medical applications and the management of
technical cooperation projects.
Since the 1980s, Brazil has been an active participant in the Regional Cooperative
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America
and the Caribbean (ARCAL), mainly as a donor country, by making available
scholarships at its nuclear institutions for the training of Latin American and
Caribbean experts and by making available Brazilian experts and instructors to
assist other countries in the region. At the moment, there are 15 regional projects
under the scope of ARCAL. Brazil also contributed to the development of the
ARCAL Regional Strategic Profile for Latin America and the Caribbean 2016-2021.
Madam President,
In recent years, the international community has been engaging in different
initiatives, both within the IAEA and in other frameworks, in the areas of nuclear
safety and security. Brazil has actively participated in the IAEA Conferences and in
the Nuclear Security Summits, and it develops and implements robust, effective
and adequate legislation in these areas.
Brazil is fully committed to the safe and secure use of nuclear technology, as that is
the only way that humanity can fully benefit from it. The strengthening of
international commitments in these areas must serve the purpose of providing a
stable environment which facilitates the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, by preventing risks and threats that may result from the inappropriate or
non-authorized use of nuclear energy.
It is our view, however, that legitimate concerns with nuclear security and safety
cannot be used as pretext for the imposition of constraints on the inalienable right
of States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Madam President,
In the field of nuclear safety, the Fukushima accident (March 2011) was
undoubtedly the most significant event in recent years.
Our collective response through the IAEA was timely and appropriate. An IAEA
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety gathered in June 2011 and requested the
Agency's Director General to develop a draft Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, which
was adopted by the Board of Governors and unanimously endorsed by the General
Conference in September of that year.
In Brazil's view, progress in the implementation of the Action Plan has been good,
in large measure thanks to the work of the IAEA Secretariat. An impressive 
11
number of activities has been undertaken so far, not only in the field together with
Member States but also in respect of the review of the Agency's safety standards
concerning the design and operation of nuclear power plants (NPPs), protection of
NPPs against severe accidents, and emergency preparedness and response.
Brazil also wishes to express its satisfaction with the results of the Diplomatic
Conference of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS),
which took place last February under the able leadership of Argentina. In line with
other efforts being undertaken to improve nuclear safety at the national, regional
and global levels, the Vienna Declaration adopted at the Diplomatic Conference
represents a significant building block in reinforcing the CNS peer review
mechanism and establishing principles to guide Contracting Parties, as
appropriate, in the implementation of the objective to prevent accidents and
mitigate radiological consequences should they occur.
Madam President,
The international community must be permanently committed to eliminating risks
and threats arising from any possible destructive use of nuclear energy. This
includes preventing terrorists or other non-authorized actors from gaining access
to nuclear devices, materials and facilities.
As Brazil stressed in the Nuclear Security Summit that took place last year in the
Netherlands, it is not civilian nuclear facilities, but atomic bombs that pose the
greatest security risk to our societies. Today, as we know, all stockpiles of nuclear
material for military use are exempt from multilateral control mechanisms. As a
matter of fact, according to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
(UNIDIR) and the International Panel on Fissile Materials (IPFM), 98% of the
highly enriched uranium and 86% of the separated plutonium stockpiles
worldwide are possessed by the nuclear-weapon states.
The most effective way to reduce the risk that non-state actors make use of nuclear
energy for destructive purposes is therefore the total elimination of all nuclear
arsenals.
These concerns have led Brazil to submit, along with fourteen other countries with
a similar view, the Joint Statement to the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit titled "In
larger security: a comprehensive approach to nuclear security." We understand
that it is impossible to dissociate the quest for nuclear security, as is also the case
for nuclear non- proliferation, from the effective implementation of disarmament
commitments established in the NPT. A world that accepts nuclear weapons will
always be insecure. It is essential to eliminate such weapons, which, because of the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of their use, remain a permanent threat
to humanity.
It is Brazil's view that the Nuclear Security Summit process has accomplished the
goal of drawing the attention of policy makers at the highest level to the issue of
nuclear security. We expect that, after the Summit that will take place in the United
States in 2016, our collective efforts in this area will converge to the IAEA, a truly 
12
universal forum that is fully equipped to take the matter in its hands with the
capability and commitment that are commensurate with the importance that we
all ascribe to the issue of nuclear security.
Madam President,
Brazil considers that the decision to withdraw from the Treaty — as from any
treaty freely subscribed to — is a sovereign right recognized under international
law. The rigorous procedure established under article X is a recognition of the
Treaty’s relevance to international peace and security. Upon receiving any notice
of a State's decision to withdraw from the Treaty, the Security Council should
carefully assess the extraordinary events deemed to have jeopardized the supreme
interests of the withdrawing country, with a view to, if possible, address that
State's concerns and enable the continued membership of that State in the Treaty.
It is my country's view, however, that discussions on withdrawal from the NPT
should focus less on constraints to be applied to those States parties that may
potentially leave the regime and more on the incentives for States parties to
remain within it. That main incentive would be the implementation of all of the
Treaty's pillars, particularly the nuclear weapons States disarmament obligations.
Madam President,
The NPT regime faces a critical juncture. The Treaty cannot be simply a tool to
manage deeply embedded inequalities. It must correct them in order to uphold its
credibility and efficacy, preserving its role as the keystone in the disarmament
architecture designed by our predecessors to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons.
Thank you.