Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
On behalf of my delegation, let me begin by extending our congratulations to the Chairman and members of the Bureau on your election. I also would like to reiterate our support and cooperation to the concerted and continuous efforts to the achievement of successful outcome of this important event as well as the on-going implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We also would like to welcome Timor Leste as a new member of the NPT.
The Non Proliferation Treaty has been widely acknowledged as the corner stone of the global non proliferation regime that has been, in a number of respects, a notable success.
As stated in the Constitution of the Country, Cambodia prohibits the manufacturing, use, storage of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. Within the ASEAN framework, Cambodia actively participated in the 37th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting in June last year, and would like to reiterate its full support of the efforts to further strengthen cooperation in supporting the implementation of the Treaty on Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, with a view to promoting the purposes and objectives of the Treaty, particularly ensuring early accession of the Nuclear Weapon States and urged them to sign the Protocol of the Bangkok Treaty at the soonest possible opportunity.
As many State Parties to the NPT, Cambodia is also in support of the fundamental role of IAEA as an instrumental organ in the full application of and verification of compliance with the international safeguards obligation under article III of the Treaty as well as the efforts to strengthen the regime. Cambodia also noted the significance of the Model Additional Protocol as the ideal instrument for making the IAEA system more efficient and effective.
5. Learning from its past experiences about the danger of nuclear weapons, the international community should make every effort possible to ensure that humankind could live without the threat of nuclear weapons. Cambodia also would like to reiterate its full support for the achievement of the noble goal of elimination of nuclear weapons for the benefits of our future generations.
Thank You.
