
Thank you Mr. Chair,
On behalf of the Canadian Delegation I would like to offer my warm congratulations on your election and assure you of my delegation's support in your work.
2009 marks the 40th anniversary of the opening for signature of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. These past four decades have been characterized by a high degree of peaceful and constructive cooperation among States Parties. And although the outcome of the 2005 Review Conference was a disappointment, we must use it as an opportunity to learn and do better this time, A realistic and balanced agenda for the 2010 RevCon, one that will allow States Parties to advance the NPT's objectives in each of the Treaty's three pillars, should be the top priority of everyone in this room over the next two weeks. Rather than starting from scratch, Canada does not object to using the agenda from 2000 - with updates as necessary - as a basis from which consensus can be built at this PrepCom.
Canada is optimistic that the goals of this PrepCom can be realized, but only through constructive dialogue and a spirit of flexibility and compromise. If we can emerge from this PrepCom with an agreed agenda, and perhaps even concrete recommendations for consideration in 2010, we can march toward the RevCon together, with confidence and optimism.
The cause for optimism has not always been apparent. The DPRK's actions mark a defiant challenge to the NPT which has yet to be adequately addressed. Canada welcomes progress made by the Six Party Talks, but is discouraged by North Korea's recent missile launch. We continue to call upon the DPRK to comply with Security Council resolutions, to meet its Six Party Talks commitments, and to recommit itself to the NPT.
We are also deeply concerned about Iran, whose decades-long concealment of its nuclear activities has led to the loss of confidence by the IAEA Board of Governors and the adoption of five resolutions at the UN Security Council which it continues to defy today. Canada urges Iran to restore confidence and work proactively with the IAEA. Syria, too, is alleged to have engaged in the clandestine construction of a nuclear reactor. While recognizing that states have a right to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, this right comes with obligations - obligations which in this case have not been met.
Mr. Chair,
Canada continues to emphasize the need for meaningful and balanced progress on each of the three pillars. On the disarmament pillar, Canada welcomes reductions made by Nuclear-Weapons States in recent years, and is particularly encouraged by the renewed momentum of disarmament talks between Russia and the US. We sincerely hope that these two States can accomplish the goal set out in the April 1 Joint Statement to complete a new, legally binding successor agreement to START I by the end of this year. However, we must remember that negotiations on disarmament are the collective responsibility of all States Parties.
On the non-proliferation pillar, despite some recent progress, we note with regret that FMCT negotiations in the CD have still not begun, the CTBT is yet to enter into force, and the disarmament commitments made in 1995 remain unfulfilled. Progress on these initiatives is crucial for nuclear disarmament. We continue to urge all states that have not yet done so to ratify the CTBT; enter into negotiations on a verifiable FMCT in the CD; and establish effective nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy pillar, Canada firmly believes that nuclear energy has a critical role to play in increasing prosperity, contributing to sustainable development, limiting greenhouse gas emissions, and reducing the disparities between developed and developing countries. For these and other reasons, we joined with numerous NPT states to supporting peaceful nuclear cooperation with India.
Mr. Chair,
We are entering a promising new era for disarmament and arms control - one in which diplomacy and multilateral cooperation are the tools with which we can build a more secure and prosperous world. The time is ripe, then, to think seriously about how to improve the effectiveness of these tools.
Working together toward a better, stronger NPT, we must continue to call upon the States which have yet to adhere to the Treaty to accede to it as Non-Nuclear-Weapon States. We urge all remaining states to adopt the Additional Protocol, and all remaining non-nuclear-weapon States to bring into force a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, and consider this the new verification standard.
But there is more that can and must be done. Canada believes that some of the recent challenges to the NPT could be addressed by bolstering the review process through permanent political and administrative support. It is frankly disquieting that a forty-year-old, near-universal treaty that is a cornerstone of the international security regime and the only legally binding global instrument to promote nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament lacks the permanent institutional support enjoyed by even modest multilateral conventions. For this reason, Canada has once again tabled a Working Paper this year which advances recommendations to strengthen the Treaty's structure and meeting schedule.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the gravity of the task that lies ahead. We cannot afford another unproductive Review Conference. Ensuring the survival of this Treaty and its effective implementation is not just our prerogative as States Parties, but our responsibility to global peace and security. Canada is ready to work with you, Mr. Chair, to ensure this successful outcome.
Thank you.