CANADA
The Pewanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations
at Geneva
La Mission perrnanente du Canada
aupri.s des Nations Unies
i Gen6ve
Check against delivery
GENERAL STATEMENT
H.E. Ms. Elissa Golberg
Ambassador
Permanent Representative
Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva
2013 Preparatory Committee meeting of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 23 April 2013
Verifier i I'audition
INTERVENTION
H.E. Mme Elissa Golberg
Ambassadeure et representante permanente
Mission permanente du Canada auprbs de I'Office des Nations Unies 2 Genke
Reunion du Comit6 preparatoire (2013) de la ConErence
d'examen du Traite sur la non-proliferation des armes nuclkaires
ONP)
Genbve, le 23 avril 2013 
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election as Chair and assure you
of my delegation's full support.
This meeting, convened at the mid-point of the current review cycle, provides an ideal
opportunity to critically assess the status of the Treaty; to take stock of our individual and
collective progress in implementing the 2010 Action Plan; and to begin to set out those issues
that can best be addressed by the RevCon to enable the creative implementation of the Treaty
building upon the success of 2010.
It is of great concern to Canada that in 2013 we have seen further erosion of the commitment of
several States Parties to the fundamental principles enshrined in the NPT. The nuclear
proliferation activities by North Korea, lran and Syria and their continued non-compliance with
their NPT obligations undermine the Treaty and remain the most pressing challenges to its
integrity and authority. Increase in production of fissile material in states of the region poses
palpable concerns.
North Korea's nuclear test in February and its inflammatory rhetoric about nuclear weapons use
constitutes a clear and present threat to both regional and international peace and security, a
violation of multiple UN Security Council resolutions and a fundamental challenge to efforts to
advance nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. NPT States Parties must seek to ensure
that never again can a state benefit from nuclear cooperation for peaceful purposes, illegally
use this technology and material it received for weapons purposes and claim that the Treaty no
longer applies to them. Canada is very concerned that lran appears to be following this path and
using its NPT membership as potential cover to carry out nuclear weapons related research.
In this regard, we strongly condemn reports that lran intends to further expand its uraniumenrichment
capacity. Such actions by lran contravene its international obligations under both
UN Security Council and IAEA resolutions, counter the global will and undercut regional and
international security. Should lran fail to address the credible and very serious concerns about
its nuclear program, it is next to impossible to avoid the conclusion that lran is in noncompliance
with the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
States Parties must redouble their efforts to implement the 2010 Action Plan in its entirety. We
must identify not only what still remains to be done but commit ourselves to actively pursuing
further implementation of the Action Plan over the coming year. There is no doubt that the
extent to which states, and particularly the Nuclear Weapon States, are able to address their
disarmament commitments, will have an important impact on future health of the Treaty. At the
same time, the extent to which all NPT states strictly adhere to their non-proliferation obligations
and the ability of states to respond to non-compliance with non-proliferation obligations will also
affect the future of the treaty and its overall credibility. 
Canada and its partners in the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) have
continued to work to advance the implementation of key elements of the Action Plan. The group
has submitted seven working papers that make concrete recommendations to advance Action
Plan implementation.
Canada has actively sought to facilitate efforts to advance implementation of Action 15 on
FMCT negotiations, including through the adoption of UNGA resolution 67/53. 1 wish to reiterate
Canada's thanks to all States Parties that supported this resolution. With the CD still prevented
from beginning substantive negotiation of an FMCT, a Group of Governmental Experts will meet
in 2014 and 2015. The GGE will enable a focused and substantive discussion that can
meaningfully take forward substance, and whose report can potentially serve as a reference
document for eventual negotiations. We share High Representative Kane's concern over the
increase in production and the proliferation of fissile material in South Asia. We call on states of
the region to declare a moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons.
Canada is committed to advancing Actions 10-14 through the universalization of the
Comprehensive-Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and promoting its early entry into force. In October
2012, Canada completed a contribution arrangement with the CTBT Organization to provide
state-of-the-art Canadian airborne radiation detection equipment and related technical training
valued at approximately C$785,000 that is essential for strengthening the Organization's ability
to conduct on-site inspections.
We welcome the on-going meetings of the Nuclear Weapon States, including in Geneva last
week. Engagement between the Nuclear Weapon States will be critical to ensure that they are
able to meet their obligations set out in Action 5. Increased transparency is a valuable
contribution to build confidence that the Nuclear Weapon States are making progress in fulfilling
their disarmament and verification commitments. We encourage the Nuclear Weapon States to
make use of the NPDl's draft standard nuclear disarmament form that was submitted at the
2012 NPT PrepCom.
We welcome the concerted and tireless efforts by the Facilitator of the Middle East Conference
on a Zone Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction and by the three co-conveners to advance the
outcome of the 2010 Review Conference. To be successful, Canada believes that such a
Conference must be attended by all states in the region on the basis of arrangements freely
arrived at.
Canada reiterates its view that a comprehensive safeguards agreement together with an
Additional Protocol constitutes the current safeguards - standard required under Article Ill. With
this safeguards standard in place, the IAEA is in a position to draw an annual conclusion
regarding the non-diversion of declared nuclear material from peaceful nuclear activities and the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in Canada. Canada continues to urge
States that have yet to bring into force a CSA and an Additional Protocol to do so as soon as
possible 
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 Action Plan provides us with a clear path to 2015. At the half-way point of the current
review cycle, it is apparent that there remains much work to be done but that we have made
concrete progress on a number of items. Our goal must be to implement all Actions to the
greatest extent possible before the next Review Conference. This will not be easy and, in some
cases, may require overcoming incredible odds -for example ending the deadlock in the
Conference on Disarmament.
At this half-way mark, we must also continue setting the stage for a successful RevCon in 2015.
In addition to addressing the Treaty's three pillars, Canada encourages all States Parties to
consider what more can be done to strengthen the Treaty. We believe that there could be
concrete, pragmatic steps within existing resources and political will that can allow the NPT to
function more effectively as an institution and that can strengthen the principle of permanence
with accountability that underpinned the Treaty's indefinite extension in 1995. We must also look
at what steps will be needed beyond the current Action Plan to further ensure the health of this
Treaty, especially to address existing cases of non-compliance with NPT obligations.
There is every reason to believe that we can arrive at a strong and balanced outcome in 201 5 if
States Parties are prepared to commit the political will and flexibility necessary to strengthen
this Treaty and advance its implementation. Canada, for its part, stands ready to do so. The
safety and security of Canada's citizens, and those of the global community, demands no less.
Thank you, 