Mr. Chairman,
I would like at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the Chair of this session of the Preparatory Committee and thank you for the work you have done. I am confident that with your rich experience and wisdom you will guide this session to a fruitful outcome. The Chinese Delegation will fully support and cooperate with you.
Mr. Chairman,
This year marks the 40th anniversary of the conclusion of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Ever since its entry into force, the NPT has played an irreplaceable role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, advancing nuclear disarmament process and promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and has thus effectively enhanced international peace and security.
Meanwhile, we are also aware that with the changes in the international security situation, uncertainties in the security field and non-traditional security threats have increased, terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are intertwined with each other, regional nuclear issues are yet to be resolved, and the global demand for nuclear energy keeps growing. Addressing those issues appropriately is important to the universality, authority, and effectiveness of the NPT.
The start of the new round of review process provides us with an important opportunity to strengthen the NPT and address new challenges. It has been proved that the only way to strengthen the NPT is that states parties cooperate sincerely, uphold multilateralism, and promote the three objectives of nonproliferation, nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a comprehensive and balanced manner. We should make full use of the preparatory process to lay a sound foundation for the success of the 2010 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
How to reinforce the international nuclear nonproliferation regime and eliminate the threat of proliferation to international peace and security is a realistic issue faced by the international community. Proliferation of nuclear weapons is a complex issue, which requires a holistic approach to address both the symptoms and the root causes of the problem.
Firstly, a new security outlook featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination must be developed. There is a need to build an international environment of cooperation and trust, in which countries respect each other's security interests and seek universal security.
Secondly, proliferation concerns should be addressed through dialogue and negotiation. Exerting pressure, imposing sanctions or resorting to force alone are not effective ways to resolve the problems. On the contrary, those

measures will aggravate the situation.
Thirdly, the impartial and non-discriminatory nature of the international nuclear nonproliferation regime should be ensured and selective practice be avoided. The universality of the NPT should be further promoted and the IAEA safeguards should be reinforced. All states parties should faithfully fulfill their nonproliferation obligations under the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
China firmly opposes proliferation of nuclear weapons in any form. It attaches importance to and takes an active part in the international efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation. China has joined all the relevant international treaties and mechanisms in this field. It has strictly implemented IJNSC Resolution 1540 and other nonproliferation related resolutions. It has established a comprehensive system of laws and regulations on nuclear export control and continues to take effective measures to ensure their implementation.
As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has made contribution to peaceful settlement of nuclear issues in relevant regions. By this day, the Six-Party Talks on the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue and the process of denuclearization of the Peninsula have produced substantive results. Progress has been made in disablement of relevant nuclear facilities, aid to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and improvement of relations between relevant countries. China is now working hard with other parties to move forward the Six-Party Talks process. We hope that all parties will maintain sincerity and patience and jointly move the Talks to a new stage.
On the Iranian nuclear issue, we stand for a proper solution through diplomatic negotiations. With full fulfillment of its NPT obligations, Iran's right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected. This will help maintain the international nuclear nonproliferation regime and regional peace and stability, and serve the common interest of the international community. Two weeks ago at a meeting in Shanghai, the EU3+3 representatives had an in-depth exchange of views on a package proposal for resuming negotiation and they made progresses. It's necessary for the relevant parties to take creative approaches, show flexibility and reinforce diplomatic efforts in order to seek a comprehensive, proper and long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Chairman,
To build a world free of nuclear weapons is an important objective of the NPT. All nuclear-weapon states should undertake unequivocally to destroy their nuclear weapons completely and thoroughly, refrain from developing new types of nuclear weapons, and reduce the role of nuclear weapons in
their national security policies. The two countries possessing the largest nuclear arsenals bear special responsibility and should take the lead in nuclear disarmament. They should faithfully implement the relevant agreements already reached and further drastically reduce their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable and irreversible manner, so as to create necessary conditions for other nuclear-weapon states to join the nuclear disarmament process.
The "13 Practical Steps" agreed upon at the 2000 Review Conference is still relevant today. Its spirit and principles, including "promoting global strategic balance and stability" and "undiminished security for all" should continue to be upheld. Meanwhile, by taking into account the latest development of the situation, we should reaffirm those steps that are still valid and put forward new proposals reflecting the consensus of all sides.
A proper solution to the issue of "security assurance to non-nuclear-weapon states" will contribute to achieving the nonproliferation objective. The international community needs to conclude an international legal instrument on this issue at an early date. Before that, all nuclear-weapon states should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states.
As a nuclear-weapon state, China firmly supports and works hard for a nuclear-weapon-free world. And we have always stood for complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and the conclusion of an international legal instrument in this regard.
China exercises utmost restraint on the nuclear weapons development. It has never joined and will never join any nuclear arms race. China actively supports early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and has been working for an early ratification of the CTBT and will continue to honour its commitment on nuclear test moratorium. China supports that the Geneva Conference on Disarmament start, on the basis of an early agreed Programme of Work, negotiation on the Fissile Material Treaty and substantive work on the prevention of weaponization of outer space and other issues.
China remains firmly committed to the policy of no-first use of nuclear weapons at any time and under any circumstances. It undertakes unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China has signed all the relevant protocols of nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties that are open for signature. We have reached agreement with ASEAN countries on the Protocol of the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and welcome the Treaty on the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone signed by the five Central Asian states.
Mr. Chairman,
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy is an inalienable right of non-nuclear-weapon states under the NPT. Promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the major objectives of the NPT. Fully respecting this right of non-nuclear-weapon states and strengthening relevant international cooperation is conducive to consolidating the international nuclear nonproliferation regime. Peaceful uses of nuclear energy is closely related to the prevention of nuclear proliferation. The international community should handle the relationship between the two in a balanced manner and make sure that they are mutually reinforcing rather than mutually conflicting. The right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy by non-nuclear-weapon states should not be constrained or denied in the name of nonproliferation. Neither should it be allowed to engage in proliferation activities in the disguise of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The Chinese delegation holds that the international community needs to actively explore a solution which ensures the right by all countries to peaceful uses of nuclear energy and also prevents nuclear proliferation with a view to promoting international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We have taken note of the various proposals raised by relevant parties on the establishment of multilateral nuclear fuel cycle mechanisms and hope that an in-depth discussion will be held among all countries.
China appreciates the work of the IAEA in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and encourages and supports the IAEA in its efforts to make further inputs in this field and render more assistance to the developing countries. China values its cooperation with the IAEA in all respects and takes an active part in international cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Over the years, China has cooperated in various forms with many countries including other developing countries on peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We will continue to broaden our cooperation and exchanges with relevant countries in this field.
Mr. Chairman,
China places importance on this new round of NPT review and preparatory process. The last session of the Preparatory Committee held last year was a good start. We should sum up our experience and, on this basis, continue to seriously discuss all the views and proposals which help advance the three major goals of the NPT, and work for positive results at this session.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.