PERMANENT MISSION OF THE PEOPLE' S REPUBLIC OF CHINA TO THE
UNITED NATIONS AND OTKER INTERNATIONAI, ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA
Statement by H.E.Mr.Cheng Jingye
Head of the Chinese Delegation to the First Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons
(Vienna, April 30,20 12)
Mr. Chairman,
First of all, please allow me, on behalf of the Chinese
Delegation, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
Chairmanship of this session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2015 NPT Review Conference and I would like to thank you for the
tremendous work you have done for the successful convening of the
meeting. I am confident that with your rich experience and wisdom,
you will guide this session to a fruithl outcome. The Chinese
Delegation assures you of our full support and cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
This Session represents the beginning of a new cycle of the
NPT (hereinafter referred to as "the treaty") review process. China
sincerely hope that all State Parties to the Treaty could make full use
of this session to examine the current situation and tasks we are
1 
facing, and carry out in-depth discussions and make on-time sum-up
based on the experience and lessons achieved from previous review
cycles, so as to find the right direction and lay solid foundation for
the smooth advance of the 9th Review Cycle.
For over 40 years, the Treaty, as the cornerstone of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, has played an
irreplaceable role in preventing the proliferation of the nuclear arms
and promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy and has
contributed significantly to safeguarding international peace and
security. The 20 10 Review Conference for the Treaty has for another
time, after 10 years, adopted the final document and outlined action
plan to promoting the three goals of the treaty, which fully
demonstrated the willingness and determination of the State Parties
to the Treaty in supporting the treaty and strengthening the
international non-proliferation regime.
At this stage, the goal of complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons and establishment of a world free of
nuclear weapons is widely recognized, and the consensus for
non-proliferation is building in the international community, while
the demand for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is still strong.
The international society is taking practical steps in enhancing
nuclear security and safety. All these have created favorable
conditions for maintaining and strengthening the Treaty.
It should also be noted that there are many problems in nuclear
fields which cannot be neglected. The processes to solve regional
nuclear issues are encountering twists and turns, the contradiction
between non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are
outstanding, the risks that terrorist and non-state actors encroaching
on nuclear weapons are increasing. There are many problems
remaining to be solved in fields of nuclear security and nuclear
safety, the universality of the Treaty is yet to be strengthened and 
there are still many challenges facing us in order to achieve the
comprehensive and thorough implementation of the Treaty.
Chinese people cherish peace and adhere to the path of peaceful
development. We are devoted to maintaining world peace, promoting
common development and win-win cooperation. Under the new
international security situation, Chinese government actively
advocates the new security concept featuring mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation and actively pursues universal
security, common security and cooperative security. We are willing
to work together with all state parties, to keep the momentum in the
Review Cycle and take the opportunity of the implementation of the
final document of the 8th Review Conference, to promote the three
goals of the Treaty in a comprehensive and balanced way so that the
Treaty could play a bigger role in maintaining international peace
and security, promoting the economic and social developments of all
states.
Mr. Chairman,
The complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons and establishing a world free of nuclear weapons are the
common aspiration of all the peace-loving people from all countries
of the world. China stands for the following,
All nuclear-weapon states should fulfill in good faith
obligations under article VI of the NPT, and publicly undertake not
to seek permanent possession of nuclear weapons. As countries with
largest nuclear arsenals, US and Russia should continue to make
drastic reductions in their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable and
irreversible manner. Other nuclear-weapon states, when conditions
are ripe, should also join the multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament. The international community should develop, at an
appropriate time, a viable, long-term plan composed of phased
actions, including the conclusion of a convention on the complete
3 
prohibition of nuclear weapons.
Nuclear-weapon states should abandon the nuclear deterrence
policy based on the first use of nuclear weapons and earnestly reduce
the risks of nuclear weapons. The nuclear-weapon states should
unequivocally undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons
and negotiate and conclude the Treaty on Mutual No-First-Use of
Nuclear Weapons. Nuclear-weapon states should also unequivocally
undertake unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states and
nuclear-weapon-free zones and should conclude an international
legal instrument in this regard at an early date.
Nuclear disarmament is closely linked to the global strategic
stability. The development of missile defense systems which disrupt
global strategic balance and stability should be abandoned, and
multilateral negotiation process to prevent the weaponization of and
arms race in outer space should be vigorously promoted, so as to
foster favorable international strategic security environment for
nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
Ever since the first day it came into possession of nuclear
weapons, China has undertaken not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons at any time or under any circumstances and made the
unequivocal commitment that we will unconditionally not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states
and nuclear-weapon-free zones. China is firmly committed to a
nuclear strategy of self-defense and will continue to keep its nuclear
capabilities at the minimum level required for national security.
China has never deployed any nuclear weapons on foreign territory
or taken part in any nuclear arms race in any form and will never do
that in the future. 
China supports the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and
is dedicated to promoting its early entry into force. China supports
the early commencement of FMCT negotiation in the Conference on
Disarmament. China participates actively in the joint efforts of the
P5 in implementing the final document of the NPT 8th Review
Conference. And we are chairing the P5 Working Group on Glossary
of Definitions for Key Nuclear Terms. We will definitely push
forward relevant work.
Mr. Chairman,
In order to realize the establishment of nuclear weapon free
world and ensure the full exercise of all states' rights to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, the risks of nuclear weapon proliferation
must be eliminated. China stands for the following,
All countries should make efforts to foster an international
security environment of cooperation and trust, and respect the
security concerns of each other. Practices of pragmatism and double
standards must be discarded. All parties should pursue peaceful
solution to regional nuclear issues through political and diplomatic
means and should work hard to eliminate the root causes which lead
to nuclear weapons proliferation.
We should consolidate and enhance the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, strengthen the universality, authority and
effectiveness of the Treaty. We should strengthen the safeguards
function of the International Atomic Energy Agency and promote the
effective implementation and universal adherence of the
comprehensive safeguards agreements and its additional protocols.
We should strengthen the security of the nuclear materials and
facilities, combat nuclear terrorism and strengthen our export control
system and facilitate international cooperation in this regard.
Mr. Chairman, 
China firmly opposes any form of nuclear proliferation. It has
fulfilled its international non-proliferation obligations in a highly
responsible and constructive manner, and has taken active part in
international non-proliferation efforts. China has acceded to all
relevant international treaties and mechanisms, put in place a
complete legislative and regulatory framework of export control and
taken effective steps to ensure its implementation.
President Hu jintao has attended two Nuclear Security Summits
and has made important statements, which demonstrates that China
has attached great importance to nuclear security issue. China has
always been dedicated in strengthening national nuclear security
capabilities and abides by its international obligations in this regard
strictly. China carries our international cooperation extensively and
provides nuclear security assistance actively. China is willing to
work hand in hand with other states to address the challenges of
nuclear security.
To solve the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula through
dialogue and consultations in a peaceful manner, achieve the
denuclearization of the Peninsula through dialogue and maintain the
peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia are
the resolute and firm position of the Chinese Government. China
will continue to make unremitting efforts in this regard and all
parties should keep calm, exercise restraint, continue in engagement
and dialogue, and ameliorate relationship mutually so as to restart
the Six-Party Talks at an earlier date and achieve the goal of
denuclearization of the Peninsula and the long security of the
Northeast Asia.
China welcomes the positive results from the resumption of
talks between the P5+1 and Iran in Istanbul not long ago. We hope
that the P5+1 and Iran could, based on the mutual understanding
achieved from the dialogue, follow the principle of step-by-step and 
reciprocity, and move to the same direction and cooperate sincerely,
make more efforts for resolving the Iranian Nuclear issue through
diplomatic means. China is willing to work with all parties, actively
engage in promoting peace and talks, and continue to play a
constructive role in promoting the peaceful settlement of Iranian
Nuclear issue.
Mr. Chairman,
Promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy bears great
significance for the international society in coping with the
challenges brought by energy crisis and climate change. China
stands for the following,
The legitimate rights of peaceful uses of nuclear energy of all
states parties should be fully safeguarded and cannot be restricted for
the cause of preventing proliferation. The non-nuclear weapon states,
in their activities of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should also
abide by their international obligations on non-proliferation.
All states should promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
related international cooperation. The International Atomic Energy
Agency should play a bigger role in this regard. Countries capable of
doing so should actively assist developing countries in developing
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
We should sum-up the lessons from nuclear accidents seriously
and strengthen relevant international cooperation, enhance nuclear
security measures and increase the abilities to prevent and manage
nuclear accidents.
Mr. Chairman,
China attaches great importance to promote its own
development through the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It has
actively carried out cooperation and exchanges with relevant
countries and the IAEA on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, under the
7 
prerequisite of strictly abiding by non-proliferation obligations
stipulated in the NPT and within its own capability. It has made
positive contributions to the cause of peaceful uses of nuclear energy
in the region and in the world at large.
During the development and peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the Chinese Government has always been placing high importance
on nuclear safety issue and sticks to the principle of safety first.
China will continue to take effective measures, strictly implement
relevant international obligations and develop peaceful uses of
nuclear energy in an active and proper way. We will continue to
actively participate in relevant international cooperation in this
regard. The Chinese Government provided prompt assistance to the
Japanese Government right after the Fukushima Nuclear Accident.
In 201 1, Mr. Zhang Dejiang, Vice Premier of China's State Council,
as the representative of President Hu Jintao, attended the Kiev
Summit for the Safe and Innovative Use of Nuclear Energy and the
Chernobyl Projects Completion Pledging Conference. China has
volunteered to contribute 4 Million Euros to assist Ukraine in
finishing nuclear safety projects related to Chernobyl. China will
work with other states to seek the effective way to strengthen nuclear
safety.
Mr. Chairman,
China always respects and supports efforts by relevant
countries and regions in establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones.
China has ratified relevant protocols to the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, the South
Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. China welcomes the entry into
force of the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia,
and respects and welcomes Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status.
China has played a constructive role in solving the remaining issues 
related to the Protocol of Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
Treaty. We are looking forward to, together with all other relevant
parties, promoting the early signature of the Protocol. China
supports the efforts made by all parties in convening the 2012
International Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction
and is willing to make our own efforts in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
It is our common goal to promote the earnest implementation of
the Treaty and to build a harmonious world with lasting peace and
common prosperity. China is willing to work with all states, to
achieve positive outcome for this session of Preparatory Committee
and the whole Review Cycle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 