Live Version
Statement by H.E. Mr. Fu Cong
Head of the Chinese Delegation &
Ambassador for Disarmament Affairs of China at the
General Debate in the
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 NPT Review Conference
(23rd April, 2018 Geneva)
Mr. Chairman,
First of all, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the Chair of the
Second PrepCom for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. I am confident that your rich
experience and wisdom will lead this meeting to a success.
The NPT is the most important multilateral treaty in the field of international nuclear
arms control. For the past half century since its conclusion, the Treaty has served as
the fundamental legal basis and the key institutional guarantee for avoiding nuclear
war, preventing proliferation of nuclear weapons, and bringing benefit of the peaceful
use of nuclear energy to human beings. The status of the Treaty as international
customary law is beyond doubt.
Mr. Chairman,
One year ago, the new review cycle of the Treaty began with uncertainties and
questions waiting for answers from all of us.
Is the world getting more secure or insecure? On the one hand, peace and
development remain the tide of the times. The call for nuclear disarmament by the
international community goes even higher. The JCPOA on Iranian nuclear issue is
being implemented effectively. Diplomatic settlement to Korean Peninsula nuclear
issue encounters a new turning point. The cause of peaceful uses of nuclear energy
has entered into a new developing period. On the other hand, the U.S., with the largest
and most advanced nuclear arsenal, uses untenable excuses to intensify its nuclear
capability and nuclear deterrence policy and lower the threshold for using nuclear
weapons, which increases risks of nuclear aims race and threatens global strategic
stability.
Besides, should we uphold or abandon the existing disarmament negotiation
mechanism? Should we continue to stick to the principle of consensus? Divergence
between different disarmament routes is obvious, double-standard behavior related to
nuclear non-proliferation is prevailing. Deficit of trust and governance in international
1 
security is prominent. The Treaty is facing unprecedented challenges.
Mr. Chainnan,
Against the background of globalization, the cold-war mentality and zero-sum game
mindset is outdated. Pursuing absolute security will only raise tension and the risk of
war, and make the world more insecure. The world could enjoy lasting peace only by
the common security of all countries. In this review cycle, we should remain true to
our original aspiration, safeguard multilateralism fully, insist on equal dialogue and
consultation, so as to comprehensively maintain and promote the authority,
universality and effectiveness of the Treaty.
Firstly, respect each country's legitimate security concern. A world free of nuclear
weapons could not be achieved in one day. When addressing nuclear non-proliferation
hot spot issues, we could neither break away from regional security environment. We
should cultivate the awareness of a community of shared future for mankind, uphold a
new concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative, and sustainable security, in
order to build an open, inclusive, clean, and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace,
universal security, and common prosperity.
Secondly, respect the tide of the times of peace and development. Comprehensive
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons go along with the tide of the
times of peace and development. Nuclear-weapon States should take more concrete
actions to fulfill their obligations under the Article 6 of the Treaty. In this regard,
states possessing the largest nuclear arsenals bear special and primary responsibility
for nuclear disarmament. All nuclear-weapon States should reduce the role of nuclear
weapons in national security doctrines, and commit themselves in a legally binding
manner to no-first-use of nuclear weapons, which is the most practical and valuable
measure for nuclear disarmament at present.
Thirdly, respect the Treaty mechanism. Double-standard and pragmatism, which may
cause severe erosion to the authority and effectiveness of the Treaty, are the biggest
enemy of the Treaty mechanism and the existing system. While implementing the
Treaty, we must adopt the same standard from the beginning to the end.
Fourthly, respect the previous review outcomes of the Treaty. We should fully utilize
the roadmap function of previous review outcomes, engage in consultations with
constructive attitude, break the stalemate on difficult issues, such as the Middle East
WMD-free-zone, and enhance the these outcomes with our concrete actions. ·
Mr. Chaiiman,
China is committed to the path of peaceful development and has been actively
promoting the build-up of the community of shared future for mankind. China will
2 
never constitute a threat to any state, and has no intention to become a strategic
competitor of any one. China will not pursue absolute security at the price of other's
interest. No States should misread or distort China's strategic intention.
China has always stood for the ultimate complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of nuclear weapons. China sticks to a nuclear strategy of self-defense,
adopts a highly stable nuclear policy, and fully abides by its commitments of no first-use
of nuclear weapons and no use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones. China keeps its nuclear
capabilities at the minimum level required for national security.
China supports the objective and purposes of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT), and actively promotes the certification of monitoring stations in its
territory. Four additional monitoring stations in China got certified last year: China
supports the Conference on Disarmament (CD) to start the negotiation on FMCT on
the basis of an agreement on a comprehensive and balanced program of work,
pursuant to the Shannon Rep011 (CD/1299) and the mandate contained therein.
During the JCPOA implementation in the past two years, China has made in-depth
participation, led the political direction and promoted implementation process. Under
the current situation, we would continue our objective, .impartial and responsible
attitude and preserve the JCPOA together with all relevant sides.
On the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue, China has always adhered to the political
solution, held an objective and impartial position and endeavored to promote
peace talks. Currently, the situation on the Peninsular has witnessed a hard-won
relaxation. All pa1ties involved should seize the opportunity and move in the same
direction. They should follow the "dual-track approach" by promoting the
denuclearization and the establishment of a peace mechanism in the Peninsula
simultaneously, in order to forge a future featuring lasting peace and stability.
China is making extensive international cooperation on peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, taking lead for nuclear security capacity building network at the regional
level, and promoting the nuclear safety exchanges and cooperation in Asia and
Europe.
Mr. Chai1man,
China, as already entered into a new era, will continue to firmly support the nuclear
disarmament process, to uphold the nuclear non-proliferation regime, and to develop
nuclear energy industry in a safe and efficient manner. We are ready to make more
contribution to maintaining the global peace and stability.
Thank you, Mr. Chailman.
3 