PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATION S
350 EAST 35TH STREET, NEW YORK, NY 10016
http://www.china-un .org
Promoting Global Nuclear Governance
Maintaining International Security and Strategic Stability
Statement by H.E Mr. Wang Quo,
Director General of the Department of
Arms Control and Disarmament of MFA
At the General Debate in the Third Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
(New York, April28, 2014)
Mr. President,
The Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 20 15
Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference is well-timed and very
necessary. At present, fundamental and complicated changes are taking place
in the international security landscape. Finding ways to maintain
international security and strategic stability and promote global nuclear
governance is a common desire of the international community today. NPT
review process is an important platform for the global nuclear governance.
We should grasp the opportunity provided by 2015 NPT Review Conference
and use our collective wisdom to further improve the global nuclear
governance and push forward the overall process of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free world.
Mr. President,
China attaches great importance to the global nuclear governance. After
putting forward China's approach to nuclear security during the Nuclear
Security Summit in the Hague this March, President Xi Jinping gave an
important speech on the overall national security approach on 15th April. He
emphasized that "China must attach importance to both external and internal
security. Domestically, China will pursue development, reform, stability and
a safe environment. Externally, China will seek peace, cooperation, a
win-win situation and a harmonious world. China must emphasize both
development and security. China will not only pay attention to its own
security, but also to collective security. China will seek to form a community 
of common destiny and advocate that all parties involved seek mutual
benefits and interests and common security. " This position reflects the
concept of China of international security, and is the fundamental principle
of China's participation in international security affairs in general, and in
global nuclear governance in particular.
As to how to strengthen global nuclear governance and maintain
international security and strategic stability, China proposed five points for
global nuclear governance at Beijing P5 Conference: first, universal security
should serve as the fundamental goal; second, the leadership role of the P5
States should be a major driving force; third, multilateral mechanism is the
core of global nuclear governance; fourth, balanced progress and consensus
should be the basic principle; fifth, broad participation is a critical guarantee.
I would like to elaborate on the above views and propositions in the context
of the approach to nuclear security announced by China's national leader and
China's policies and practices on the matter:
First, why should we take universal security as the fundamental goal?
The world today is a community with common destiny. The states are
economically inter-dependent and rise or fall together in security. To
thoroughly eliminate the threat of nuclear weapons, prevent the proliferation
of these weapons and better utilize nuclear energy for the well-being of
mankind, we must have universal security. To achieve this, we should work
to build an international environment of peace and stability and eliminate the
root causes of conflicts and unrest. We should fully respect and
accommodate the legitimate security concerns of all countries and discard
zero-sum thinking and cold-war mindset. We should develop international
relations based on mutual understanding and trust, and dissolve disputes and
distrust through dialogue on equal footing.
To promote universal security, China is firmly committed to nuclear strategy
of self-defence, and is of the view that the nuclear-weapon states should
abandon the nuclear deterrence policy based on the preemptive nuclear strike
and undertake not to seek permanent possession of nuclear weapons. China
believes that we should take an integrated approach, addressing both the
symptoms and the root causes of nuclear proliferation. China insists on
addressing non-proliferation issues through political and diplomatic
approaches and rejecting double standards. China advocates that the
legitimate rights of peaceful uses of nuclear energy of all states should be
fully safeguarded, the international cooperation be promoted and the
2 
assistance to developing countries be increased.
Second, why should the P5 states play the leadership role?
The five nuclear-weapon states are the permanent members of the UN
Security Council, and as such they shoulder the important mission of
maintaining the global peace and stability, and also play a leading role in
global nuclear governance. It has been proved in the history that as long as
the P5 States deepen their strategic mutual trust and enhance their unity and
coordination, nuclear issues can be addressed effectively, putting the global
nuclear governanc'e and the international security and strategic stability in
the right direction.
InApril2014, China hosted the Beijing P5 Conference. The P5 States
exchanged views on the major issue of global nuclear governance, including
international security and strategic stability, nuclear disarmament, nuclear
non-proliferation, and peaceful use of nuclear energy. The P5 States issued a
joint statement, which elaborated the P5 States' strategic plans and concrete
measures on related issues. China invited all the delegates to visit the CTBT
National Data Center. The head of delegations of the P5 States also
exchanged views with representatives from academic community,
non-governmental organizations and the media. These belong to the
important measures taken by China to help the P5 States play a leadership
role in global nuclear governance.
Third, why should we maintain the multilateral mechanisms in the nuclear
field?
After decades of efforts, the international community has gradually set up a
set of multilateral mechanisms with the UN General Assembly's First
Committee, United Nations Disarmament Committee, Conference on
Disarmament, International Atomic Energy Agency and NPT Review
process as key components. These mechanisms have become the core
platforms for all states to seek peace, security and development, and promote
global nuclear governance. We can only guarantee effective participation of
the all the key actors, accommodate as much as possible the legitimate
interests and concerns of all the parties, and ensure that the issues concerned
get discussed and positive results achieved when the existing multilateral
mechanisms are allowed to fully play their pivotal role. Getting rid of the
existing mechanisms and starting all over again is neither in the right
direction nor feasible.
China always upholds multilateralism, and fully participates in the work of
3 
related multilateral mechanisms. China maintains that the universality,
authority and effectiveness of the NPT should be enhanced. China has been
voting in support of the important UNGA resolutions in the nuclear field and
supports the Conference on Disarmament to adopt a comprehensive and
balanced programme of work and conduct its substantive work, including
immediately starting the FMCT negotiations. China also supports the work
of the IAEA in this regard.
Fourth, why should we stick to the basic principles of balanced progress and
consensus?
The nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear
energy as the three pillars of the NPT are equally important, underpinning
the overall international nuclear order. We must attach equal importance to
all the three pillars and promote them in a balanced manner. Meanwhile, as
the nuclear issues are related to the international security and strategic
stability as well as the vital security and development interests of all the
countries, scientific and democratic decisions on these issues must be made
by consensus and through discussions on equal footing.
China is of the view that the three pillars of the NPT should be promoted in a
holistic and balanced manner. We hold that every country should be allowed
to enjoy its full right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy while fulfilling
earnestly its nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation obligations. China
respects and insists on the principle of consensus, believing that relevant
concerns should be addressed through dialogue and consultations. China
also believes that targets should be established and the objectives of the NPT
should be implemented collectively.
Fifth, why should we ensure the broad participation of international
community?
Global nuclear governance is not the responsibility of one single country,
neither is it the exclusive responsibility of governments. We must ensure that
all countries play their role as stakeholders, and initiatives of international
and regional organizations, NGOs and civil society should also be mobilized
to form a pattern of broad participation, active interaction and realization of
mutual-benefits.
China attaches great importance to the engagement and cooperation with
other governments, international and regional organizations, NGOs and civil
society in the process of global nuclear governance. China not only actively
makes its own efforts and contributions, but also draws lessons and wisdoms
4 
from other parties. China will integrates its work into the overall efforts of
the international community.
Mr. President,
Relationship with neighbouring countries is at the top of China's diplomatic
agenda. When engaging with our neighbours, China is guided by the
principle of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness. China is fully
committed to maintaining regional peace and security, and promoting
security cooperation with neighbouring countries. Hence, China fully
respects and actively supports the aspirations and efforts of regional
countries to establish a nuclear weapons free zone.
The five nuclear weapons states and the Central Asian countries will soon
jointly launch a signing ceremony of the Protocol to the Treaty on a
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia. The Chinese Government will
sign the Protocol. This is an important step to implement the above principle
and to deepen regional security cooperation, showing the firm commitment
by China to maintaining peace, stability and development in Central Asia.
China respects Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status. China together with
the other four nuclear weapon states issued again a joint statement in 2012,
reiterating their support for Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status and
security assurances to the country. Meanwhile, China is in favor of signing
the Protocol to the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty at the
earliest possible time, and supports the efforts to establish a WMD-free zone
in the Middle East and the convening of the international conference on this
issue at an early date. China will work with all the parties in making untiring
efforts to achieve the above-mentioned goals.
Mr. President,
As required by the Action Plan of the NPT Review Conference in 2010,
China submitted to the third Prepcom its national report on implementation
of the NPT. The report of China has four distinct features: first, the nuclear
policy part elaborated the history and cultural origins of China's nuclear
strategy based on self-defence. Second, the report gave an overview of
China's engagement in the exchanges with foreign counterparts in nuclear
field. Third, the report systematically elaborated the efforts made by China
in nuclear nonproliferation. Fourth, it provided a full picture of China's
endeavours to promote peaceful use of nuclear energy and enhance
international cooperation in nuclear safety and security, and offered the
experience of China in raising public awareness in this regard.
5 
Mr. President,
Strengthening the global nuclear governance, achieving a
nuclear-weapon-free world, and making nuclear energy to benefit the whole
mankind is in the interests of the entire international community. China
stands ready to make even greater contribution, so that the global nuclear
governance can bring more benefits to the people from round the world, and
forge a close link between the China Dream and the dreams of all the people
around the world.
Thank you, Mr. President.
6 