PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATION S
350 EAST 3 5 T H ST R E E T , NEW Y ORK, NY 10016
http://www.china-un.org
Please check against delivery
Statement by Vice Foreign Minister Li Baodong
Head of the Chinese Delegation at
The General Debate in 2015 Review Conference of
The Parties to the Treaty on
The Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
27 April, 2015
New York 
Madam Chair,
First of all, on behalf of the Chinese Delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of the 2015 NPT Review
Conference. I am confident that your rich experience and wisdom will guide
this conference to achieve a fruitful outcome. The Chinese Delegation
assures you of its full support and cooperation. I would also like to express
my appreciation to Ambassador Peter Woolcott of Australia, Ambassador
Cornel Feruta of Romania, and Ambassador Roman-Moray of Peru, chairs of
the three sessions of the Preparatory Committee, for their outstanding work.
Madam Chair,
The 2015 Review Conference is of historical significance, as 2015 marks the
70th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the end of the
World Anti-Fascist War, as well as the 45th Anniversary of the NPT entry
into force and the 20th Anniversary of the indefmite extension of the treaty.
As an important component of the post-world war international security
system, the Treaty has stood the test of changing international landscape, and
made important contribution to the endeavor of upholding international
peace, security and stability.
Firstly, the Treaty, built on the consensus of international disarmament, has
effectively forestalled the nuclear arms race, reduced the danger of nuclear
war, and served as a strong political and legal foundation for the complete
and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons.
Secondly, the Treaty has established the basic principles for non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, and put in place a constantly developing and improving
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. This regime, joined in and
complied with by most of the countries in the world, has provided solid
institutional support for non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Thirdly, all states parties to the Treaty are entitled to the rights of peaceful use
of nuclear energy. The Treaty, having put forward the principles and
framework for promoting relevant international cooperation, makes it
possible for the nuclear energy to benefit the people across the world
2 
.... '
Madam Chair,
The international security situation, on the whole, has been peaceful and
stable. On the other han~ however, international and regional security
landscape is changing rapidly. Uncertainties and destabilizing factors have
remained prominent, regional hot-spot issues keep cropping up, and
traditional and non-traditional security threats are intertwined Hence, to
promote global nuclear governance and further enhance the universality,
authority and effectiveness of the Treaty are the call of the times and the
shared responsibilities of all states parties. To this end, I would like to make
the following proposals:
First, firmly uphold peace and stability. It is important to follow the trend of
the times featuring peace and development, uphold universal security,
abandon the outdated Cold War Mentality and zero-sum game, increase
strategic mutual trust and cooperation, and reduce uncertainties and
destabilizing factors in the security field Only in this way will we be able to
honor the solemn commitment made in the UN Charter, that is, to "save the
succeeding generations from the scourge of war which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind"; and to attain the purposes and goals
of the Treaty, that is, to achieve comprehensive prohibition and thorough.
destruction of nuclear weapons, and bring the benefit of nuclear energy to the
mankind
Second, firmly promote equality and justice. Both nuclear weapon states and
non-nuclear weapon states shoulder the responsibility of promoting global
nuclear governance in a way that serves the common interests of all parties,
and are entitled to the benefits of global nuclear governance. We must
abandon the practice of double standards and fully respect the legitimate
interests and concerns of all countries. We need to solve hot-spot issues
peacefully through. equal consultation and dialogue, stay committed to
multilateralism and consensus building, and uphold the authority of
multilateral mechanisms, including the NPT review process, UNGA fIrst
committee, Conference on Disarmament and U.N. Disarmament
Commission.
Third, fmnly pursue win-win cooperation. Nuclear disarmament, nonproliferation
and peaceful use of nuclear energy, as the three pillars of the
Treaty, must be advanced in an all-round, balanced and sensible way, as they
concern the security of all countries and the well-being of their people. In the
3 
Treaty review process, it is important to advocate a nuclear culture of winwin
cooperation and build a community of common destiny featuring the
extensive involvement of and mutual accommodation between governments,
international and regional organizations and non-governmental groups. In
addition, efforts should be made to enhance dialogue with non-states parties
and encourage them to unconditionally accede to the Treaty as non-nuclearweapon
states at an early date.
Madam Chair,
Now the Chinese people are working in unison under the strategic plans to
complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and
to comprehensively deepen reform, advance law-based governance, and
enforce strict Party conduct. Our objective is to realize the "two centenary"
goals for China's development and to realize the Chinese dream of great
national rejuvenation. To this end, China needs a peaceful and stable
international environment. Since the beginning of last year, the overall
security concept, the approach to nuclear security and other important visions
put forward by President Xi Jinping have guided China's efforts in
participating in international security affairs and advancing global nuclear
governance.
China, as a staunch champion for nuclear disarmament process, stands for
the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and
has faithfully fulfilled its nuclear disarmament obligations under the Treaty.
Over the decades, China has pursued a nuclear strategy of self-defence and
kept its nuclear arsenal at the minimum level required for its national security.
China has neither deployed nuclear weapons in any other country nor taken
part in any form of nuclear arms races. Among nuclear-weapon states, only
China has pledged unconditionally not to be the first to use nuclear weapons
and not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclearweapon
states.
China fmnly upholds nuclear non-proliferation regime. We oppose the
proliferation of nuclear weapons in any form and work for the diplomatic
resolution of regional hot-spot nuclear issues. China has been deeply
involved in the negotiation process of the Iranian nuclear issue, actively
offering its visions and contributing positive energy. We stay committed to
realizing the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and upholding peace
and stability in both the Peninsula and Northeast Asia. China fully supports
4 
;
--
the international efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. The National
People's Congress of China ratified the Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia last week. We have resolved all pending
issues of the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear WeaponFree
Zone with ASEAN countries and are ready to sign the Protocol at an
early date. China supports the early convening of an international conference
on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East.
China actively promotes the peaceful use of nuclear energy. While fully
respecting and frrmly upholding the legitimate rights of all countries to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy, China has taken an active part in and
promoted relevant international cooperation. We support the IAEA in playing
an important role in this regard and call on developed countries to provide
more assistance to developing ones. China also supports IAEA's central role
in enhancing nuclear security and safety and assisting all countries to improve
their nuclear security and safety capacity.
China has updated its last year National Report on the Implementation of the
Treaty and submitted it to this Review Conference. The report expounds
China's stance, propositions and efforts in nuclear field
Madam Chair,
The Review Conference of the Treaty convenes every five years. What we
have achieved is remarkable. Looking forward, we have full confidence in
future, and are also keenly aware of the long way ahead. The Chinese
delegation is ready to work together with other parties to do a thorough
review of the implementation of the Treaty and identify the focus and
priorities for the work in the next five years on the basis of the Action Plan of
the Eighth Review Conference in 2010, so as to generate further political
momentum for the Treaty.
To conclude, I wish this review conference a full success.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
5 