PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
PERMANENT MISSION AT GENEVA
Statement by Mr. Pang Sen, Head of the Chinese Delegation,
Director-General of the Department of Arms Control and
Disarmament of MFA of the People's Republic of China
at the General Debate in the Second Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Geneva, April 22,20 1 3 
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese Delegation sincerely congratulates you on your assumption to the
Chairmanship of this session of the Preparatory Committee. I would like to thanlc you for
the tremendous work you have done for the convening of the meeting. I am confidelt that
with your rich experience and wisdom, you will guide this session to a positive outcome.
My delegation assures you of our full support and cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
After almost half a century of trials and tribulations, the NPT has become a
cornerstone of the international nuclear lion-proliferation regime. It plays an
indispensable role in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, promoting nuclear
disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The NPT review process has
become an important mechanism for maintaining international peace and security.
At present, the goal of establishing a world free of nuclear weapons is more widely
shared. The consensus on preventing proliferation of nuclear weapons is gaining greater
strength. The demand for the peaceful use of nuclear energy is still strong. These facts
provide great momentum for strengthening the NPT regime in a comprehensive manner.
However, we must not underestimate the challenges facing the NPT. The
international security situation is unstable, laden with growing uncertaintiec, and
compounded by both traditional and non-traditional security threats, which has brought
about severe impact on our efforts to strengthen the universality, authority and
effectiveness of the NPT.
It would be futile to try to meet these challenges by acting alone, even more so by
resorting to force. The Chinese Government always advocates peace over conflict,
development over poverty, and cooperation over confrontation. In international relations,
we actively promote a spirit of equality and mutual trust, of inclusiveness and mutual
learning, and of cooperation and mutual benefit. We are ready to join other States parties
to maintain a good momentum for the review process of the NPT. Together, we must
make sure that this PreCom produces a solid basis for a successful 2015 Review
Conferencc.
Mr. Chairman,
The international community must work together to make steady progress in the
international nuclear disarmament process, to remove all risks of nuclear prolife:ation,
and to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as there is no other alternative if we
are to achieve the effective enhancement of the NPT. In this context, China would like to
state the following:
Nuclear-weapon states should abandon the ~luclear deterrence doctrine based on the
first use of nuclear weapons. They should publicly undertake not to seek permanent
possession of nuclear weapons, and should fulfill their nuclear disarmament obligations.
Countries with thc largest nuclear arsenals bear special and primary responsibility for
nuclear disarmament. They should continue to make further substantial reductions in their 
nuclear arsenals in a verifiable and irreversible manner. The development of missile
defense systems which undermine global strategic stability should be abandoned, and
efforts should be made to vigorously promote non-weaponization of outer space, so as to
foster a favorable international strategic security environment for nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear proliferation must be addressed in an integrated manner by tackling both the
symptoms and the root causes of the pr,oblem, and through political and diplomatic
means. Double standards must be forsaken. It is essential to consolidate the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime, to strengthen the safeguards function of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and to promote universal adherence to the
co~nprehensive safeguards agreement and its additional protocols. It is essential to further
improve nuclear export control systems, to enhance the security of nuclear facilities and
material, and to combat nuclear terrorism.
The legitimate rights of peaceful uses of nuclear energy of all states parties should
be fully safeguarded and should not be restricted on the grounds of preventing
proliferation. Non-nuclear-weapon states must also abide by their international nonproliferation
obligations in their peaceful use activities. In this connection, it is high time
to give a strong boost to international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
and to scale up relevant assistance to developing countries. There is a need for intensified
nuclear security measures, and improved capacities for accident prevention and control in
order to guarantee the safe utilization of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
China has always stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of
nuclear weapons, and actively promoted the establishment of a world free of nuclear
weapons. China has kept its nuclear capabilities at the rninimurn level required for
national security. China has never deployed nuclear weapons on foreign territory. China
has never taken part and will not take part in any form of nuclear arms race.
China is firmly committed to its nuclear strategy of self-defense. China has adhered
to the policy of no-first-use of nuclear weapons at any time or under any circumstances,
and made the ~~~iequivocal commitment that we will unconditionally not use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free-zones.
Furthermore, China respects and supports the efforls by countries or regions concerned to
establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. So far, China has signed and ratified all existing
protocols to thc Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone Treaties opened for signature.
China firmly opposes any form of nuclear proliferation. We earnestly implement our
international non-proliferation obligations, and have actively taken part in international
non-proliferation efforts. China has established a complete legislative and regulatory
framework of export control which meets international standards.
Aimed at maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, and
safeguarding international and regional piace and security, China has always been
promoting peaceful solutions to regional nuclear issues. China persists in solving the
nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula through dialogue and consultations. We remain 
committed to achieving the denuclearization of the Peninsula, as well as inaintlining
peace and stability in ihe Korean Peninsula and Northeast Asia. We will continue our
efforts to prornote all parties to seek a balanced solution to each others' concerns through
the Six-Party Talks and other dialogues, and to de-escalate the current tension.
China also stands for solving the Iranian nuclear issue through negotiation and has
played a constructive role in facilitating the dialogue process. China hopes that all
relevant parties will promote substantive negotiation to achieve progress, and seek a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution in a step-by-step manner.
China attaches great importance to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We have
made positive contributions to the international and regional efforts in this regard. China
actively supports and takes part in the technical cooperation activities organized by the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and makes timely and full contributions to the
technical cooperation fund. We have assisted in the smooth running of IAEA's technical
cooperation projects within our capacity and actively participated in the international
cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
China has made unremitting efforts in the nuclear field. The P5 Worlting Group on
the Glossary of Definitions for Key Nuclear Terms chaired by China started its work in
June 2012. The Group held its first meeting successfully in Beijing last September. So
far, the P5 experts have reached a preliminary agreement on a list of key nuclear terms.
Work on the compilation and translation of the Glossary is scheduled to be concluded in
next 2 years. Its outcome will be reported to the 2015 NPT Review Conference. China
welcomes the entry-into-force of the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty
and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia. We hope that the
outstanding issues related to the relevant Protocols will be resolved at early date. China
supports the early convening of an International Conference on the Establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction
in 2013. We are ready to work with all parties to achieve this objective.
Mr. Chair~nan,
The rapid development of globalization has turned human society into a community
with a common destiny. Wc must work together to make full use of the NPT review
process to promote the international nuclear disarmament process, to enforce the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, to prornote peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to improve nuclear
safety and security, and to maintain international peace and siability. China is ready to
make its contribution to this endeavor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 