Check Against Delivery
Statement by H.E. Mr. Fu Cong,
Head of Chinese Delegation,
Ambassador for Disarmament Affairs of
the People’s Republic of China
at the General Debate in the First Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Mr Chairman,
First of all, on behalf of the Chinese Delegation, I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of this session
ofthe Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. I am
confident that your rich experience and wisdom will guide this
conference to a fruitful outcome. The Chinese Delegation assures you of
its full support and cooperation.
This meeting formally launches the lO review process of the NPT.
Looking back, from its entry into force in 1970 and indefinite extention in
1995 onwards, the Treaty has gone through winds and rains for almost
half a century, and turned to be an international legal instrument with near
universal ratification. Over the years, the Treaty has played a crucial role
in containing the trend of nuclear weapon proliferation, reducing the risks
of nuclear war, and promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
At a new historical starting point, the international arena is undergoing
unprecedented developments. Complexity and uncertainty has become
the new reality of international security. While recognizing the historical
contribution of the Treaty, we also see new challenges laying ahead, with
the international consensus of upholding the treaty under test.
First, the international security situation remains wonisorne. Hotspot
issues keep propping up, conflicts and even wars occur now and then.
Non-traditional security threats continue to spread. Cold War mentality
and power politics remain persistent. In pursuit of absolute security, some
countries keep building and deploying global anti-missile system at the
expense of strategic balance and stability. Under this background, how to
effectively take forward nuclear disarmament is a pressing issue facing us
in this review cycle ofthe NPT.
Second, the nuclear non-proliferation situation remains severe. Several
countries still linger outside the Treaty system. The establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction is long delayed. Regional hotspot issues are still outstanding.
The supply and demand of sensitive nuclear materials in a certain country
are still seriously unbalanced. The double standards and utilitarianism
approaches adopted by some countries are jeopardizing the authority of
the Treaty and weakening the nuclear non-proliferation system.
Third, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is facing multiple challenges.
The development of nuclear power is on the rise while the impact of
Fukushima nuclear accident wears on. The nuclear terrorism threats allow
of no neglect. Global nuclear security and safety need to be improved.
The tendency of “value non-proliferation while neglecting peaceful uses”
exists. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the developing countries
are still faced with restraints in terms of technical, financial and human
resources.
Mr. Chairman,
As the cornerstone of the existing international arms control and
nonproliferation regime,the Treaty’s role and function is indispensable
and irreplaceable. Under current circumstances, this review cycle should
learn from the successes and setbacks in past implementation, and focus
on facilitating State Parties to bridge divergences, strengthen unity and
confidence,take joint actions to promote the three pillars in a balanced
manner and enhance its authority, universality and effectiveness.
First, to pursue a common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security concept. In his address at the United Nations Office at Geneva in
January, Chinese President Xi Jingping raised Chinese proposition of
“building a community of shared future for mankind, and achieving
shared and win-win development”, and advocated to build up a world of
lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity through dialogue
and consultation, joint efforts and win-win cooperation. Towards this end,
we calls on all Parties to make further efforts to eradicate the roots of
conflicts and unrest, fully respect and accommodate other’s legitimate
security concerns, abandon the Cold War mentality and foster
international relations featuring mutual understanding and trust, so as to
create a strategic security environment favorable to the Treaty goal.
Secondly, to take forward nuclear disarmament in a rational and
pragmatic manner. The complete prohibition and thorough destruction of
nuclear weapons in the end is in the interest of all mankind, in this regard,
2
we fully understand the aspirations and expectations of all
non-nuclear-weapon States, and support the achievement of eventual
complete and thorough nuclear disarmament. Currently, the key task is to
find a practical and feasible path to promote the nuclear disarmament
process. Taking into account current strategic security environment, we
should revitalize the existing multilateral disarmament mechanism, make
full use of the Conference on Disarmament and other platforms, adhere to
the principle of consensus, guarantee full,equal and effective participation
of all stakeholders and seek international consensus as widely as possible.
Meanwhile, we should take a step-by-step approach. Countries possessing
the largest nuclear arsenals should continue to shoulder the special and
primary responsibilities. Pending the realization of complete and
thorough nuclear disarmament, nuclear-weapon States should undertake
practical intermediate steps, including committing themselves to no first
use of nuclear weapons, undertaking unconditionally not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or
nuclear-weapon-free zones, and conclude relevant international legal
instrument accordingly.
Thirdly, to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime by addressing
both the symptoms and the root causes. One of the root causes of the
on-going hot-spot issues is that the security concerns of different
countries are not equally treated and respected. The international
community should abandon double standards and address these issues
through political and diplomatic means. In order to ease the tension over
the Korean Peninsula and pull relevant parties back to the negotiating
table at an early date, China has put forward the “dual-track approach”
and “suspension for suspension” proposal, which we hope could be
seriously considered by the concerned parties. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an international agreement concluded through
long tough negotiations by the P5+1 and Iran, and has been endorsed by
the United Nations Security Council. All parties should continue to
faithfully fulfill their obligations and jointly support and implement the
JCPOA. The establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, as stipulated in relevant
NPT resolutions, will be conducive to regional peace and stability. We
encourage relevant parties to undertake flexible and pragmatic measures
to break the stalemate and convene relevant international conference at an
early date. Countries that have not yet joined the NPT should do so as
non-nuclear-weapon States as soon as possible.
3
Forthly, to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy on the principle of
fairness and efficiency. If nuclear weapon is damned as the Sword of
Damocles hanging over mankind, then nuclear energy should be seen as
the fire brought by Prometheus to mankind, which provides an important
solution to energy security and climate change. Non-proliferation efforts
should not undermine developing countries’ legitimate rights in relation
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. State Parties should give their
continuous support to the central role played by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in this regard. Assistance and support to
developing countries should be increased. Lessons from the Fukushima
nuclear accident should be drawn to help improve global nuclear safety.
Capacity building on nuclear security should be strengthened to combat
nuclear terrorism.
Mr. Chairman,
China has consistently supported the nuclear disarmament process, firmly
upholded the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, and
vigorously promoted the utilization of nuclear power. China actively
participated in the P5’s endeavor to implement the review outcomes of
the Treaty, and is ready to continue its leadership to the P5 Working
Group on Key Nuclear Terms. China has made steady progress regarding
preparation to the domestic implementation of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).Last December, the Lanzhou
Radionuclide Station has been certified by the Preparatory Commission
of CTBTO, making it the first certified CTBT monitoring station in China.
China firmly opposes the proliferation of nuclear weapon in any form,
and actively engages in the political settlement processes of regional
hot-spot issues such as the Iranian nuclear issue and the Korean Peninsula
nuclear issue. China vigorously participates in regional and global nuclear
security cooperation, and will actively implement the Five Proposals
including “building nuclear security capacity network” proclaimed by
President Xi at the Forth Nuclear Security Summit.
Mr. Chairman,
Well begun is half done. We hope the First Session of the Preparatory
Committee could get a good start-off for the review cycle, conclude a
feasible roadmap on institutional arrangements, lay a good basis for
States Parties to constructively advance the review work. China will stay
in touch and work together with all States Parties to this end.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
4