
Mr. President,
Allow me to congratulate you on your election as President of the Third
Preparatory Committee. I and ensure you the full cooperation of the Colombian
delegation in the efforts to promote the work of this Conference.
In 1986, lxtapa (Mexico), the recently deceased Colombian Nobel of literature
Gabriel Garcia Marquez addressed the Meeting on Disarmament held in this
city on the occasion of the commemoration of the 41 anniversary of the
explosion of the atomic bomb in Hiroshima.
I would like to share with you an extract from his speech, published under the
title: " The cataclysm of Damocles " because it reflects with extraordinary
harshness, the fundamental risk posed by the very existence of nuclear
weapons:
One minute after the last explosion, more than half of the humans would be
dead. Oust and smoke from the continents in flames will defeat sunlight, and
absolute darkness will reign on the world one more time. A winter with orange
rains and gelid hurricanes will tum back ocean timings and currents in the
rivers, fishes inside them would have died in thirst while wading the boiling
waters. Birds shall not find any sky. Never melting snow will cover Sahara
desert and the wide Amazonia will be erased from earth due to devastating
hails. This age of rock & roll and transplanted hearts shall be taken back to their
glacial childhood. Those few human beings who would survive the first horror,
and those who had the privilege of safe refuge at three o'clock in the afternoon
of that fateful Monday when the big catastrophe took place, would have saved
their lives only to die later due to the horrifying memories. In the middle of
eternal humidity and everlasting nights, cockroaches will be the only remain of
the lives, which were once on earth.
Unfortunately today, 28 years after his shocking speech, 35 years after the work
of the Conference on Disarmament started, over 40 years that the Nuclear NonProliferation
Treaty has entered into force and having passed the context of the
Cold War, the words of the Colombian Nobel continue to have the same effect
at the time they were pronounced.
Mr. President
Colombia is a country committed to general and complete disarmament of
weapons of mass destruction. In this sense, as a non-nuclear-weapon State, it
is a fundamental principle of our foreign policy to ensure compliance with
international standards for the destruction of nuclear arsenals, nonproliferation
and the strictly peaceful use of nuclear capacities.
For my country is of significant importance the NPT Review Conference, to be
held in 2015. Allow me, Mr. President, to reaffirm our commitment to the
5 
- ----- -------------
purposes of this Treaty and to reaffirm that we will continue working for its
effective implementation, as we have done it in the two previous Preparatory
Conference, and we will do in the Third session Sessions that brings us
together today.
Mr. President:
Considering not only the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons, but also its
existence, my country calls upon the parties to comply with their commitments
under Article VI of the NPT and move towards the total elimination of these
weapons.
This purpose was emphasized in the context of the last" High-level Meeting of
the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament", which took place in New York
on September 26, 2013, in which the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, CELAC, among other things, reaffirmed the importance of
nuclear, complete and verifiable disarmament as the highest priority and
reiterated that the only guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons is their total elimination. Additionally, the group identified a legitimate
interest of non -nuclear weapons states, including all members of the CELAC
that states possessing nuclear weapons provide unequivocal and legally
binding warranties to do not use or threaten to use these weapons.
Thus, given the threat to humanity posed by the continued existence of nuclear
weapons and their possible use or threat of use, as it was reiterated in the two
versions of the International Conference on the humanitarian impact of Nuclear
Weapons, the latest one held on 13 and 14 February 2014 in Nayarit (Mexico).
Mr. President:
We are proud to be state party to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco), under
which the Latin American continent and Caribbean became the first nuclearweapons-free
zone in a densely populated region. This regional palpable
commitment has contributed to peace and security, both hemispheric and in a
global scale manner. Following this example, Colombia will continue to strongly
support the establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free zones in other regions of
the planet.
Specifically, let me point out that Colombia supports the convening of a
conference as soon as possible to address the issue of the establishment of a
Nuclear-Weapons-free zone of and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction in the
Middle East in accordance with the decision taken at the NPT Review
Conference, held in 2010.
Mr. President:
Although nuclear weapons have only been used twice, there have been more
than a thousand nuclear tests, contributing to the improvement of these
weapons, i.e. vertical proliferation. Even though we welcome that 183 States
6 
have signed and 162 have ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test, including
44 States from Annex II , we consider that the entry into force of the Treaty is the
best way to avoid proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As a State Party
listed in Annex 2, we are honored to introduce ourselves as a country
committed to its early entry into force.
Finally, I highlight the support of Colombia to multilateral efforts to rid the world
of the nuclear threat, represented by the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, the possible use of nuclear energy for terrorist purposes and the
existence of nuclear weapons.
********Paragraph to be inlcuded
Mr. President:
Our duty as diplomats is to make every effort to prevent the apocalyptic ending
that Garcia Marquez described in the above-mentioned intervention.
You can count on my delegation strong support to achieve the goal to save the
planet from "cataclysm of Damocles" that represents the potential annihilation of
nuclear weapons whose danger never stops increasing.
Thank you!
7 