Mr. Chairman,
At the outset let me start by expressing to you my delegation's satisfaction on seeing a distinguished representative from our region preside over this important Review Conference. Also, Colombia associates herself to the statement delivered by His Excellency, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) States that are Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Since 1968, when the Treaty was signed, global nuclear proliferation has shown that it is now at its very peak; the worldwide nuclear proliferation situation gradually but steadily grows more grave. In spite of this worrisome tendency, the NPT remains the principal bulwark against nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism. Its features turn the NPT into one of the most important international security bargains of all rime: States without nuclear weapons pledge not to acquire them, while nuclear-armed States commit to eventually give them up.
Despite the spirit and the contents of the NPT as well as the numerous Suites that are currently parties to it, both die NPT and the broader nuclear non-proliferation system are under great stress. As we attend today this Review Conference to assess die treaty's implementation and progress during the past Eve years, it is evident that global security and proliferation challenges are as complex as they were in the 1960s when the NPT was conceived and created. Some Nuclear States still remain outside the NPT and the existing global stockpiles of highly enriched uranium and plutonium pose another significant threat to global peace and security.
We also note with great concern the lack of progress since the 2000 Review Conference, when 13 practical steps were agreed upon in order to help States Parries to meet their commitments under Article VI of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
The fact that States partaking in die so-called "Nuclear Club" still possess nuclear weapons reinforces the lacklustre progress on nuclear disarmament, as opposed to the will and commitment by countries like Colombia which advocate disarmament and non-proliferation. Besides being a State Party to the NPT, Colombia's traditional commitment with total and comprehensive disarmament also manifests itself in our participation in the negotiation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and the consistent establishment of the Organization for the Proscription of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (known for its Spanish acronym OPANAL). We are also a Signatory State to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
Regarding the latter, Colombia appreciates the support of the States Parties in the Preparatory Commission in order to happily solve the difficulties that currently hinder us from a prompt ratification of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
I am very glad to announce in the framework of this Review Conference that Colombia is about to adhere very soon to the Safeguards Additional Protocol. This will be another confirmation of my country's pacifist vocation and its position on disarmament and non-proliferation.
Aware of the necessity to avoid nuclear proliferation, Colombia abides by the mandate of Security Council resolution 1540 as well as the other initiatives that help avoid the diversion of nuclear material and technology for terrorist purposes. Nevertheless, it is my delegation's point of view that controls should be imposed not only to horizontal proliferation (more countries with more nuclear weapons) but also to vertical proliferation (qualitative development of weapons already in the hands of nuclear countries). My country advocates the strengthening of the NPT and a greater clarity in the procedures to sanction the NPT members' failure to fulfill the Treaty.
My Government also thinks that one of the most fruitful ways to limit proliferation is the reduction of the tension atmosphere in conflict zones by attaching political will to the process of solving differences. In this regard, Colombia unconditionally supports the initiatives on education for disarmament that arose during the 2002 Preparatory Commission and encourages all Member States to impulse and sponsor programmes, seminars, internships and research on the pacific use of nuclear energy as well as educational materials on non-proliferation for all audiences and educational levels.
As a co-author of the "5 Ambassadors Initiative", Colombia has helped to boost the work of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva so as to loosen the agenda of this multilateral forum in order to reopen its negotiations. We. believe, that the international community has the right to expect a reconsideration of the strategies by nuclear States so that a new committee, to be called Ad Hoc Committee on Nuclear Disarmament, can be established in the Conference on Disarmament. This would follow up the various resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly.
I also want to highlight the recent session of the Conference of States Parties to the Treaties establishing Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zones, held in Mexico City at the end of April, 2005. It is highly satisfactory to confirm that the Southern Hemisphere is free from nuclear weapons and my country joins the voices calling for the need to agree on treaties to establish nuclear-weapons-free zones in the rest of the world.
Mr. President, I finally want to stress my country's position as a State Part}- to the NPT in that the international community shall not permit the enlarging of the amount of members of the so- called "Nuclear Club". Such a thing would bring about the extension of the balance of terror. For Colombia, the only option and die only way out of the world's crossroads concerning nuclear weapons is their total elimination.
The NPT must be taken by the States in its integrity: disarmament, non-proliferation and technical cooperation are all fundamental parts of the Treaty and have the common purpose of achieving international peace and security without nuclear terror. This is why compliance with the Treaty is essential.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

