PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
TO THE OSCE, UN AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN VIENNA
A-1030 VIENNA, RENNWEG 3
TEL: (+43 1) 535 0137; FAX: (+43 1) 535 0134; EMAIL: cromiss.vienna@mvep.hr
Statement of the Republic of Croatia
as delivered by the Ambassador and Permanent Representative
to the OSCE, UN and International Organizations in Vienna
Dubravka Plejic Markovic
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
First session, Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Mr. Chairman,
Let me begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of
the first Preparatory Committee of the 2020 NPT Review Conference, and
assure you of my country’s full support to your efforts in the following days.
Let me also say that the Republic of Croatia shares views presented in the
General Statement of the European Union. As the member state of the EU we
stand united in support for the Treaty.
NPT enjoys Croatia’s firm support as we see Treaty’s contribution to
international peace, security and stability, ever since it entered into force in 1970
as crucial, in achieving predictable and more secure world and in its role in
developing nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes.
Non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are
three equally important and mutually re-enforcing pillars of the NPT – we need
to reach global acceptance and ensure its uncompromised implementation.
Today, as the new review cycle for the NPT starts, we recall the 2010 Action
Plan and the important tangible measures pertaining to the three pillars of the
NPT contained therein. Actions laid-out in this document are equally valid today
and when implemented can and will bring us closer to the ultimate goal of a
world without nuclear weapons.
Let me here also recall the central role played by the IAEA in strengthening the
international security architecture. While article IV of the Treaty grants all NPT
State Parties the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes the role of the
IAEA in strengthening States’ capacity to ensure that all the norms pertaining to
safety and security are rigorously observed and implemented is of critical
importance. Responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy is still
one of the major tasks we all should aim to fulfil.
Croatia fully supports the strengthening of effectiveness of the IAEA safeguards
system, which plays essential role in the implementation of the non-proliferation
commitments under the NPT. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and the
Additional Protocols are the verification standard of today and we call for their
universalisation.
Croatia welcomes the entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and adds its voice to the call on all
States with nuclear facilities to become contracting parties to the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and Radioactive Waste.
Another instrument of global importance for nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
efforts The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and
its entry into force and universalisation remain constant security priority for
Croatia. We wish to add our voice to the global plea to States that have not yet
done so, in particular those listed in Annex 2, to sign and ratify this Treaty.
CTBT’s invaluable monitoring and verification system is a success story of
global non-proliferation and scientific cooperation, but continuing efforts are
necessary to encourage the completion of this system and to achieve, at last, the
entry into force of the Treaty.
Finally, we wish to join the international call for the immediate commencement
and early conclusion of the negotiation in the Conference on Disarmament of a
Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices (FMCT), on the basis of document CD/1299 and the
mandate contained therein.
Mr. Chairman,
The UNSCR 1540 and subsequent resolution adopted last year 2325 represent
another important milestones in ongoing efforts to curb proliferation efforts.
Allow me here to say few words on current proliferation challenges such as
those posed by the DPRK which by its nuclear testing and missiles launching is
testing the international order and posing a global threat. We call on the DPRK
to comply with its international obligations and re-engage meaningfully with the
international community.
As we are nearing the fiftieth birthday of the NPT, we need to remain united in
determination to uphold and preserve this Treaty at the heart of our global nonproliferation,
arms control and disarmament efforts. 
We embark on the difficult road towards the 2020 Review Conference with the
burden of unsuccessful 2015 Conference and additional responsibility that stems
from that.
This time we must succeed.
Therefore we have to use time in front of us wisely and efficiently, and against
this background Croatia recognizes today’s meeting as particularly important.
Thank you.