

The Sixth Review Conference of States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including the Czech Republic, will be held in New York from 24 April to 19 May 2000. Non-proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction and their delivery means, disarmament, arms control, maximum transparency in trade in materials, equipment and technologies usable for arms programmes in sensitive regions are among long-term priorities of the Czech Republic's foreign policy. For these reasons, the Czech Republic regards the NPT as one of the essential tools in the regime of global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. The Czech Republic is therefore interested in universal adherence to the Treaty and consistent implementation of all documents adopted at the NPT Fifth Review and Extension Conference held in 1995.
With regard to the present complicated international situation in the field of nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament, the Conference does not have much hope of a major success. Nevertheless, the Czech Republic is of the opinion that it is necessary to build on the progress achieved since the last Review Conference. This applies in particular to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) negotiated in 1996, the Additional Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement enhancing the safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the ongoing reduction of nuclear weapons held by the United States and Russian Federation under the START-I and START-II treaties. The unilateral measures taken by the United Kingdom and France namely as regards the reduction of their nuclear arsenals and ratification of the CTBT have also contributed towards this progress.
The Czech Republic proceeds from the premise that nuclear disarmament will be a long-term and gradual process. In this context, it supports an early entry into force of the CTBT and a speedy opening of negotiations on the Treaty Banning the Production of Fissile Material for Nuclear Weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. It supports the elaboration of a legally binding instrument on negative security assurances of nuclear-weapon States for non-nuclear-weapon States, and on voluntary transfer of military fissile material under IAEA safeguards. The Czech Republic attaches exceptional importance to the revitalization of the disarmament process in the field of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and has therefore welcomed the ratification of START-II treaty by the State Duma of the Russian Federation. The Czech Republic regards the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty as one of the fundamental pillars of strategic balance. In the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Czech Republic supports measures making the exchange of scientific and technical information conditional on responsible approach to nuclear non-proliferation. 
