Mr. President,
Allow me first to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of President of this Review Conference. We are convinced that your able leadership will facilitate a successful outcome. I can assure you of our full support.
Mr. President, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, Denmark stands fully behind the statement delivered yesterday by the High Representative on behalf of the European Union.
Denmark is also a member of an informal group of countries cooperating in Vienna on matters relating to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Vienna Group of 10 has presented a set of working papers which I recommend for your attention. They deal with non-proliferation issues and peaceful use and include ideas that may inspire the final documents from this Review Conference. I hope you will find them useful and worthy of support.
Mr. President, the NPT has served us well over the last several decades. Considering the widespread fears before its entry into force in 1970 I feel grateful for what has been achieved. The world is more secure thanks to the NPT. Yet there are shortcomings and uncertainties. However, a new, positive momentum seems to be gaining ground. President Obama's speech in Prague last year was instrumental. So was UN Security Council Resolution 1887 stating the vision of a world without nuclear weapons.
The purpose of my presence today is to express our sense of urgency and our support for a balanced outcome of the Review Conference. Such an outcome must contribute to progress within all three pillars of the Treaty, non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful use of nuclear energy. I believe this requires attention at the highest level to this Conference during the next four weeks.
Also, this is not at matter for the nuclear powers alone. I come from a small country without nuclear weapons or nuclear reactors. Yet our security is just as much influenced by the Treaty as everyone else's. This concerns us all, and all concerned must contribute to make hope prevail over fear.
States Party may view some parts of the treaty as more relevant to their interests than others. States are not clones of course, our priorities may differ. That makes for an interesting dialogue. But we must resist any attempt to misuse differences in perspective to selectively neglect issues or block consensus, so that we can adopt a truly global and balanced final document.
I believe there is growing understanding and acceptance of the need to be comprehensive, of the wholeness of the Treaty. It is essential that we all contribute to the new momentum. It is my sincere hope that the overwhelming majority and hopefully all States Party at this Conference will
confirm the basic principles of the NPT as the universal, global non-proliferation instrument,
agree on a set of concrete, effective, pragmatic and consensual measures along the lines of the EU working paper, and
• consider possible ways of improving our procedures to strengthen implementation of the Treaty.
I also encourage all efforts to ensure progress on the creation of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
I welcome the success of the START negotiations between the United States and the Russian Federation and express our hope for an early ratification of the new Treaty. My country encourages negotiations among those concerned with a view to further reductions. We acknowledge the difficulty of the issue, but the sense of movement and direction must not be lost.
There are other developments outside the Treaty framework that would contribute significantly to the Treaty's objectives. I encourage all to do their utmost to ensure the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and to commence negotiations on a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty (FMCI). The commitments undertaken at the recent Nuclear Security Summit must also be noted. We firmly support these initiatives.
Mr. President, the NPT was meant as a universal instrument. Its purpose cannot be fully achieved unless all States become party. Universal adherence therefore remains an important goal; non-adherence a serious concern. Denmark supports efforts to convince outstanding States to join the Treaty as non-nuclear weapons states. We are ready to discuss ways to advance this goal.
In the same vein, we support considerations of steps that may be taken if a State Patty decides to withdraw from the Treaty in violation of the terms of Article X. Fortunately there is just one example. Such a step should be recognized as a potential threat to international peace and security.
Withdrawal becomes even more serious if the State Party in question is not in compliance with its obligations. We share the view that obligations deriving from the NPT and commitments undertaken to fulfill those obligations cannot be terminated simply by withdrawing from the Treaty.
As for compliance in general, Denmark strongly supports the IAEA safeguards system and will use its present membership of the Board of Governors of the IAEA to promote, inter alia, recognition of the additional protocol as today's verification standard.
To sum up, Mr. President, The NPT is essential to the preservation of world peace and security as well as efforts to maximize civilian benefits of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. However, peaceful use must respect non-proliferation obligations; non-proliferation is not sustainable without disarmament; and disarmament both supports and depends on security. We cannot handle such issues separately. We must address them all constructively. That is what I consider to be a balanced outcome. That is what our delegation will work for.











Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



