1
Statement by Ambassador Uffe A. Balslev
Undersecretary for Disarmament,
Non-Proliferation and Arms Control
Head of delegation of the Kingdom of Denmark
to the 2nd Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
General Debate
22 April 2013
2
Thank you Mr Chairman,
Let me join others in congratulating you on your election as chair of this PrepCom.
Denmark associates itself with the statement made by the European Union. I can
therefore concentrate on a few issues of particular importance to my delegation.
o0o
As a long-standing member of the Vienna Group of 10 that has now existed for
more than 30 years, Denmark fully associates itself with the statement made by
Ambassador Woolcott of Australia.
I recommend all of the six working papers presented by the group that generally
underline the key role played by the IAEA. In this regard Denmark underlines the
need for insuring adequate means and resources to uphold the Agency’s capabilities,
particularly in the areas of nuclear verification, security and safety.
One paper relates to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. The CTBT touches
exactly on the issues of horizontal and vertical proliferation that strains the
disarmament processes today. All remaining countries, that have yet to do so,
should with all expediency sign and ratify the CTBT and refrain from nuclear
testing , any other nuclear explosions and from the use of new nuclear weapons
technologies.
Furthermore, we underscore the crucial role that export controls play in our
endeavours under the NPT. We urge all States to establish and maintain effective
national export controls for nuclear and related dual-use goods and technology,
including as required by UN Security Council resolution 1540, and we commend
the work being done under regimes such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Zangger Committee, the Australia Group, the Wassenaar Arrangement and the
MTCR.
o0o
At previous meetings Denmark has joined the group of countries behind a
statement expressing deep concern by the devastating immediate and long-term
humanitarian effects that could follow from the use of nuclear weapons; and so
again at this PrepCom with the statement presented by South Africa. In our view
this third-track approach to disarmament and non-proliferation is not meant to
undermine existing multilateral or bilateral nuclear disarmament mechanisms. They
have indeed produced reductions that we welcome. Nor is it meant to reinterpret 
3
well-established international humanitarian law. We hope through a fact-based
discussion to expand the group of concerned countries, including with the P.5., and
to increase awareness of these humanitarian consequences.
Increased awareness will help us in our efforts to raise thresholds and significantly
diminish the role of nuclear weapons in military and defence doctrines. And it will
help us redouble our efforts for a continued, gradual and irreversible reduction of
all nuclear weapons, including strategic, non-strategic, deployed and non-deployed
weapons, aiming at their total elimination.
o0o
The gradual approach also assumes a geographical form. Denmark supports the
continued development of internationally recognized nuclear weapon free zones,
established on the basis of agreements freely arrived at among states of the regions
concerned.
At the 2010 Review Conference we decided on a conference on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons as well as other weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery scheduled to take place in 2012. Its
postponement was indeed regrettable. But it was a missed deadline not a lost
opportunity. We expect the Conference to be convened as soon as possible and
urge constructive participation by all States of the region. We applaud the continued
exceptional work of the facilitator Ambassador Laajava and stand ready to
contribute if and when it could be useful.
The government of Denmark also finds the proposal for an Arctic zone free of
weapons of mass destruction worthy of further pursuit. It could prove to be a
useful contribution to global peace and arms control from the countries and
peoples of the High North. Denmark will continue to engage our close friends and
neighbours in the Arctic in discussions on this topic in the non-confrontational and
constructive spirit that pervades all our cooperation the Arctic.
o0o
Mr Chairman,
The NPT remains the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and global nonproliferation.
But it is also a cornerstone under stress: By the more than a decadelong
stalemate in the CD; and by successive set-backs for global non-proliferation
that undermine both regional and global peace and security. The lack of progress in
restoring confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear activities,
4
including at the latest meeting with the E3+3 in Almaty, is deeply worrying. There
is an urgent need for Iran to step up its cooperation with the IAEA. The recent
nuclear and missile tests by the DPRK are equally worrying. We urge both
governments to comply fully with all their obligations, including resolutions of the
UN Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
The international community expects us to address these challenges to the integrity
and credibility of the NPT in a resolute way. It expects a productive outcome of this
PrepCom, and it expects a clear affirmation of our commitment to actively
implement the Action Plan agreed at the 2010 Review Conference.
With you in the chair, Mr Chairman, I feel confident and optimistic that we will get
there and I can assure you of the full support of the Danish delegation.
Thank you for your attention.