Mr, President:
First at all allow me to congratulate you on your election as President of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation Nuclear Weapons. We are confident that your vast experience will contribute to the success of our deliberations and 1 reiterate the support of the Dominican delegation in the development of so worthy functions.
My delegation fully endorses the statement pronounced by Indonesia on behalf of the Non Aligned Movement. At the same time, we would also like to highlight some aspects which we consider essential in the NPT review process.
Mr. President:
The Dominican Republic is a nuclear-free state that supports any initiative that contributes to multilateral peace and world progress. To that extent we are part of the NPT, the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty, as well as other international instruments designed to ensure the protection of populations against the use of weapons of mass destruction, among others the Convention on the Development, Production and Accumulation of Bacteriological and Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction.In this regard, it should be noted that the use of the nuclear energy has both great benefits and challenges. The same technology capable of providing solutions contributing to the welfare and progress of mankind is also capable of producing the most destructive weapons. Remember one of the basic principles of radiological protection, or the "Justification of the practice in other words, the benefits from the use of Nuclear Technology, must be greater than the damage it may cause.
Since the beginning of the atomic age, the international community has been building a system that allow States, in a secure and trustworthy framework, to receive the benefits of these technologies, to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to work together for the total elimination of nuclear weapons which are a serious threat to the human species.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation Nuclear Weapons has been the cornerstone on which this system has been built. The Dominican Republic, State Party of the NPT since 1971, remains committed to its principles, rights and obligations.
We believe that the implementation of its three pillars: disarmament, nonproliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy, will lay the groundwork for achieving a future free of nuclear weapons for the future generations.
Mr. President:
The Dominican Republic, one of the founding members of the IAEA, would like to stress the great work undertaken by the Agency promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and its efforts ensuring safe and reliable use of nuclear energy. The IAEA also encourages all countries to benefit from these technologies, through its technical cooperation program, which are a primary element in the framework of the NPT.
The Dominican Republic, in compliance with its obligations under the NPT and the Treaty of Tlatelolco, signed a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with IAEA, in force since 1973. In the same vein, we have accepted the amendments approved by the Board of Governors of the IAEA in 2005 the text of the Small Quantities Protocol, which aim of strengthening the IAEA safeguards regime.
Moreover, the Dominican Republic is pleased to announce the entry into force of the Additional Protocol to its Safeguard Agreement signed with the IAEA, promulgated on March 18, 2010 by His Excellency Dr. Leonel Fernandez Reyna, President of the
Republic. This decision is an indication of the importance given by the Dominican Republic to the strengthened safeguards put in place by the IAEA, which can provide effective guarantees of the peaceful use of nuclear material and its non-diversion to weapons purposes. We believe that the signing of Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols by States that have not already done, is an essential factor for strengthening the implementation of the NPT.
Mr. President:
The Dominican Republic expresses its unconditional support to the nuclear-weapon-free zones as a key mechanism to promote disarmament and peace and for preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. It explains why my country is part of the Treaty of Tlatelolco since 1968 and why it welcomes the creation of new nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world.
In disarmament, we welcome the positive developments shown by the Nuclear Weapons States, in particular the agreement reached by the Governments of the United States and the Russian Federation to reduce their arsenals of strategic weapons, which is a very important step in this context. We encourage the strengthening and gradual expansion of such agreements.
Mr. President:
The Dominican Government would also reiterate the importance it attaches to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty of Nuclear Testing and its early entry into force as an indispensable complement to the principles enshrined in the NPT. We strongly believe that the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty of Nuclear Testing is essential to avoid development of nuclear weapons.
That's why we commend the efforts undertaken by the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and its Provisional Technical Secretariat for promoting the early entry into force of the treaty and for setting up its envisaged verification regime.
Finally, Mr. President, I wish to reiterate the support of the Dominican Government for this NPT review process, which we hope will contribute to the strengthening of this valuable international instrument and also enhance the implementation of the commitments derived from the Treaty's universality and its benefit for the international peace and security.
Thank you










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



