Statement by
H.E. Ambassador Alaa YOUSSEF
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt
to the United Nations Office, Geneva
The Second Session of the Preparatory Committee to the 2020
NPT Review Conference
General Debate
Geneva, April 2018
Check against delivery
2
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, allow me Ambassador Adam Bugajski to
congratulate you on assuming the task of presiding over the
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee to the 2020
NPT Review Conference. As we continue our review cycle,
we have full confidence that your expertise will guide our
meeting to a fruitful outcome.
Mr. Chairman,
There is a common belief among the NPT States Parties
that the Treaty represents the cornerstone of the nuclear nonproliferation
and disarmament regime. Since its entry into
force, the Treaty has played a significant role in preserving
international peace and security. Additionally, the Treaty's
relevance has been vigorously asserted through the inclusion
of most of the members of the international community.
More, however, is still needed to achieve its universality. The
objectives and purposes of the Treaty will never be fulfilled
if a single State remains outside its framework.
This review cycle is clearly beset with many challenges; at
the forefront of which is the evident willingness among some
of its States Parties to either reinterpret their obligations and
commitments in relation to nuclear disarmament, or by
adopting policies and doctrines contrary to its letter and
spirit.
Following the conclusion of the First Session of this
review cycle in Vienna 2017, a Treaty on the Prohibition of
3
Nuclear Weapons was adopted on 7 July 2017. In our
perception, the new Treaty is another testimony to the
centrality of the NPT and its preamble clearly reflects this fact.
By participating in the United Nations Conference that
negotiated the new Treaty, non-nuclear weapon States have
clearly brought into force their obligation to pursue on their part
effective measures on nuclear disarmament as the drafters of
the NPT originally envisioned. Implementation of Article VI of
the NPT is a collective obligation on all NPT States Parties.
Mr. Chairman,
The three pillars of the NPT, non-proliferation; nuclear
disarmament; and peaceful uses of nuclear energy; were all
perceived by the drafters of the Treaty as mutually
reinforcing that should be simultaneously pursued in a
balanced manner. This, nevertheless, was not effectively
achieved. There has been a growing focus during the work of
previous review cycles on the pillar of non-proliferation, with
less focus on the other two pillars, particularly nuclear
disarmament.
Egypt perceives, with utmost concern, the limited progress
relating to nuclear disarmament which still does not live up
to expectations. Although limited measures are taken
unilaterally and bilaterally in pursuit of nuclear disarmament,
what we really lack is a concerted multi- lateral effort, with a
clear time table for the full implementation of Article VI
leading towards nuclear disarmament in a verifiable manner.
It has to be noted that, we will not be able to maintain a
strong and effective nuclear
4
nonproliferation and disarmament regime unless Article VI
is fully implemented.
Mr. Chairman,
While noting that horizontal proliferation still remains a
possibility, it is most obvious that vertical proliferation, by
upgrading existing nuclear weapons and developing new
ones, is a crucial challenge that requires the immediate
attention of the NPT States Parties. In this vein, my
delegation would like to emphasize that nuclear nonproliferation
must be achieved in all its aspects
simultaneously with parallel efforts, in good faith, aimed at
achieving nuclear disarmament.
A rather disturbing reality is the cooperation between NPT
States Parties and non-NPT States in the nuclear field. This
comes contrary to the Treaty's provisions and the agreed
commitments. The direct and immediate consequence of
such cooperation will certainly undermine all efforts aimed at
achieving the universality of the Treaty, which is the only
means to further ensure strengthening and maintenance of the
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
Egypt views with serious concern this cooperation, and
calls upon NPT States Parties currently engaged in such
cooperation, or planning to do so, to reconsider their policies
and bring them in line with the Treaty's provisions and their
existing commitments and obligations. We call as well on all
remaining non-NPT States to adhere to the Treaty without
further delay, as non-nuclear weapon States, and take all the
s
required measures under the authority of the IAEA to put all
their nuclear facilities under comprehensive safeguards
agreements.
Mr. Chairman,
Almost twenty-five years after its adoption, the call for the
implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East
remains unheeded. Not only does the resolution remain
unimplemented, but efforts to pursue its implementation are
also deliberately obstructed by some NPT States Parties;
members of the very same community that should have been
keen to see the resolution fully implemented.
To set the record straight, the 1995 resolution was adopted
as part of a package which secured the indefinite extension of
the Treaty. Nuclear weapon States, particularly the cosponsors
of the resolution, should should exert their utmost
effort seeing the resolution's implementation through its final
phase.
While the 1995, 2000, and 2010 NPT Review Conferences
reaffirmed the importance of Israel's accession to the NPT
and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards, regrettably, no progress
has been achieved so far thereof. Israel remains the only
country that refuses to adhere to the NPT in the Middle East
while concurrently running un-safeguarded nuclear facilities.
As an outcome of this review cycle, NPT States Parties
should agree on the necessary measures required to ensure the
early adherence by Israel to the Treaty and theplacement
6
of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive safeguards
agreements.
Mr. Chairman,
As one of the three pillars of the Treaty, the inalienable
right of the NPT States Parties to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy should be at the centre of each review cycle. States
Parties to the NPT should promote international cooperation
in the field of nuclear energy through the fullest possible
exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technical
knowledge. Enforcing this right, in line with the Treaty's
prov1s1ons, and without discrimination or conditionality,
should be actively pursued by all States Parties, so as to
maximize mutual benefits. Nuclear energy could
significantly contribute to the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), provided that provision of
technical assistance and cooperation is ensured. Egypt
endeavors to fully exploit the full potential that peaceful uses
of nuclear energy could provide for the achievement of its
development agenda.
Mr. Chairman,
As we embark on our work in this Session, Egypt
reiterates its support to you and promises its active and full
participation in the discussion on all Clusters.
Thank you.