General Statement by H.E. Mr. Jüri Seilenthal, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Estonia to United Nations Office and other international organizations in Geneva
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 22 April-3 May 2013
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on your
election as the chair of the second Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference.
You can count on the full support of the Estonian delegation. Aligning ourselves fully with the
statement on behalf of the European Union, we would like to make some remarks on issues that
Estonia attaches particular importance to.
We have gathered here today to give our assessment of the current review cycle of the NPT- the
cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime- with mixed emotions. The
successful Arms Trade Treaty negotiations in New York enhanced our confidence in effective
multilateralism and its tangible results in the area of arms control. At the same time, the nonproliferation
regime is being challenged by provocative actions and inappropriate threats. We
strongly condemn the nuclear test conducted by the DPRK, most recently on 12 February 2013
and all the subsequent provocative acts and aggressive rhetoric, considering these to be clear
violations of UN Security Council Resolutions and call on the regime of the DPRK to avoid any
further provocations that could deteriorate regional and global security.
The DPRK has ceased all cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
has not returned to full compliance with its NPT safeguards obligations. The agency has not been
able to implement full safeguards measures in the DPRK for almost a decade now. According to
Article X of the NPT, each State Party exercising its national sovereignty has the right to
withdraw from the Treaty. However, the withdrawal should be carried out without previous
violations of treaty obligations. The lessons learned motivate us to consider how to reduce any
incentive to abuse Article X. The NPT review cycle offers a good opportunity for working on
those issues with an aim of addressing them at the next Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman. The 2010 NPT Review conference Action Plan was indeed very ambitious and the
health of the whole review cycle depends on how we can best achieve those tasks stipulated in the
document. One of the most delicate issues concerns the Conference on the establishment of a 
Middle East Zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction,
scheduled to take place in 2012. While regretting the postponement of the conference, we reaffirm
our full support for the tireless efforts of Ambassador Jaakko Laajava in facilitating the
preparatory process. The matter is sensitive and requires a lot of trust and confidence between the
relevant stakeholders.
Mr. Chairman. Article VI of the NPT constitutes a solid foundation where rule of law in
disarmament can be built on. Creating conditions for a world free of nuclear weapons, without
jeopardising international stability and diminishing security, requires further bilateral as well as
multilateral efforts. Enhancing the transparency of existing nuclear arsenals and increasing mutual
confidence between nuclear weapon states are necessary elements of taking nuclear disarmament
forward. We take note of the progress in implementing the new START treaty and welcome the
pursuit for a future agreement between the US and Russia for broad and reciprocal reductions in all
categories of nuclear weapons- including tactical nuclear weapons, which have not been covered
by any legally binding arms control agreement.
As for multilateral disarmament, we deeply regret that another year is going by with the
Conference on Disarmament (CD) unable to start negotiations or even agree on a program for its
work. The inability of the CD to fulfil its mandate is a major obstacle in implementing Article VI
of the NPT– namely to pursue negotiations in good faith on a treaty on general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control.
The next logical multilateral step towards nuclear disarmament is to start negotiations on a Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) – a universal agreement banning the production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. Despite lacking a binding and universal
instrument, states concerned could establish a moratorium on the production of weapons-grade
fissile material. A good example of norm-setting practice without complete universalization is the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), where most of the Annex II states have
imposed a moratorium on nuclear tests. A moratorium, however, is still a voluntary commitment
that cannot fully substitute the legal obligations imposed by treaties. Therefore we urge the states,
particularly those whose adherence is required for the CTBT to enter into force, to sign and ratify
the treaty without further delay.
Despite all these concerns, we should also keep in mind positive improvements – notably in the
field of export control. Strong and effective export controls ensure that nuclear trade for peaceful
purposes does not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. Nuclear Suppliers Group is working hard to keep pace with the changing world. We
would like to recognize the importance of effective export controls and encourage all states to
make use of multilaterally agreed guidelines and principles in developing their own national export
controls.
Mr. Chairman, the first session of Preparatory Committee in Vienna last year was dominated by a
constructive atmosphere and co-operative spirit. We do hope that Vienna spirit has proliferated
also to Geneva and will help you guide this very important meeting to a successful conclusion.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.