2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Statement by
Mr. Klaus Korhonen
Ambassador for Arms Control
Head of Delegation
Finland
New York, 28 April 2015
(check against delivery)
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I fully associate myself with the statement given by the European Union and would like to make
a few additional remarks on behalf of the Finnish Government.
Our priorities are also reflected in working papers prepared by the five Nordic Countries and
Vienna Group of 10. Finland is pleased to work again with these and other countries for the
success of the Review Conference.
For Finland the three pillars of the Treaty – disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy - are of equal importance and interrelated. We attach great importance to the
implementation of the Treaty as well as its universalization. Nuclear power represents a major
component in Finland’s energy mix with nearly 30 % of our electricity production. A functioning
nuclear regime provided by the NPT is important for our national interests and an essential
element of international security architecture.
We believe that other initiatives and institutions complement the central role of the NPT. Finland
is pleased to contribute to work on addressing nuclear threats by hosting at the level of senior
officials the next Plenary of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism in Helsinki next
June.
Madame President,
The existence of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass-destruction is a man-made
problem. They have been created by human beings and they can be removed by human beings.
We should ask whether it is acceptable - or even possible - to base security on such weapons.
Their use or accidental detonation could cause death and unspeakable suffering to a very large
number of people, most of them civilians. And we know that any nuclear war would have
detrimental impact on a global scale.
Nuclear weapons can and must be eliminated. We all agree that this should be our goal. I use
the opportunity to remind the conference that tactical or non-strategic nuclear weapons are not
covered by any legally binding verifiable international arrangement. The need to reduce the
number of these weapons and to create a normative framework must be addressed by this
session.
We need unity in this effort and an inclusive approach. Nuclear disarmament will take place only
if countries which actually possess these weapons are involved. The initiative on the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons has given new impulse to the debate on disarmament
and non-proliferation, and we see broadening readiness to participate in the discussion from a
humanitarian point of view. 
Two nuclear weapon states in the NPT, the United States of America and the United Kingdom,
took part for the first time in a Humanitarian Impact Conference in Vienna in December. We
welcome this opening and encourage those nuclear weapon states, which are not yet part of this
process, to follow suit.
Madame President,
Nuclear weapon proliferation poses a serious threat to international peace. All states should
respect their commitments under the NPT by adopting and implementing the IAEA
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement together with the Additional Protocol. We continue our
efforts to strengthen the IAEA safeguards system and to promote its universalization.
One way to work towards a world free of nuclear weapons is by creating zones free of these
weapons. Regions like Latin America and Central Asia have already shown leadership by paving
the way.
Countries in the Middle East have continued to engage with the Facilitator and the Coconveners
in order to fulfil the mandate of convening a Conference on the establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear and other Weapons of Mass-Destruction.
We are certainly encouraged by the on-going efforts to seek a diplomatic solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue. The agreement on Parameters for a Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a major
step forward. It is important that all parties build on the current momentum in order to
complete the negotiations. Finland continues to support the work of the IAEA under the
Framework for Cooperation.
Madame President,
Finland entirely subscribes to the view that all Parties of the Treaty should promote the
development of responsible and peaceful use of nuclear energy while ensuring that related
technologies and goods are not disseminated for other than peaceful purposes. There is a
balance of rights and responsibilities of all Parties to the Treaty regarding the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. Finland is fully committed to its international obligations and participates in
further developing international standards to ensure safety of nuclear energy.
In this context it is essential that countries using nuclear power, or embarking on nuclear
programmes, have a sound legislative and regulatory framework in place. 
Madame President,
In a challenging time like this we should continue to strengthen norms that are vital for
international security and mutual trust. We have seen that this is possible. Finland welcomes the
work that has recently been invested in promoting the objective of a Fissile Material Cut-off
Treaty (FMCT) by the Group of Governmental Experts. Their report, adopted by consensus,
inspires us all to work towards the start of negotiations on this Treaty.
We should focus on what unites us, not on what divides us. Finland will support every effort
towards a consensus outcome and an action oriented outcome of the 2015 NPT Review
Conference.
Madame President,
Last but not least I join previous speakers in congratulating you on your election as President of
the Ninth Review Conference of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. I would like to assure you of the full support of my delegation.
I thank you.