First Meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT
Revliew Conference
(Vienna, 30 Apra-11 May 2012)
Statement by the Head of the French Delegation
General Debate
Mr Chairman, Dear Colleagues,
My country fully associates itself with the statement of the European Union and with
the statement made on behalf of the five nuclear-weapon States.
I. I should first like to congratulate you on your election to the Chair. Your
appointment brings with it a major responsibility, that of launching a new review
cycle. I am sure that your experience and personal talents will enable you to conduct
your task perfectly. I assure you of the full cooperation and support of my delegation
in the performance of your duties.
2. The nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, negotiated over 40 years ago, remains more
than ever the cornerstone of the international community's action to respond to the
current serious proliferation crises and to questions about nuclear safety and security
linked to peaceful uses. The NPT also remains the foundation for disarmament
progress.
3. This new cycle starts with two major assets :
- A strong political consensus, expressed by the 189 parties to the treaty at the 2010
Review Conference;
- An ambitious road map, adopted by consensus at the 2010 conference, which clearly
marks out the path for us to drive forward this treaty.
Although the States party were unable to come to an agreement in 2005, the final
document adopted in 2010 contains a pragmatic, balanced action plan on the three
pillars of the Treaty.
NIr Chairman, Dear Colleagues
4. Our first task is to implement this road map.
France is satisfied with and fully supports this road map. We would have liked the
elements on proliferation crises to be more incisive, to reflect more closely the reality
of these crises. They could also have been more ambitious on the subject of NPT
withdrawal and States' compliance with their international obligations. However, we 
know that the text is the result of a delicate compromise. It is in this spirit of
compromise that we call on all parties to adhere to this achievement, which enables
us to forge ahead to work towards a safer world.
We now need, individually and collectively, to implement in a balanced manner the
three pillars of this Action Plan.
5. France will fully discharge its responsibilities with respect to the Action Plan and as
a nuclear-weapon State. We are already preparing to report in 2014, as called upon by
the Action Plan, on our work on implementing the conclusions and recommendations
of the 2010 Final Document.
I am pleased to announce that my country has met today the objective defined by the
President of the French Republic in zoo8 to reduce our deterrent's airborne
component by one-third, that is to say the missiles and nuclear warheads that make
up this component. All in all, in the last 15 years, we have cut the number of nuclear
warheads by half and, in a first and for the sake of transparency, announced the
ceiling of nuclear warheads in our possession, which now number less than 300.
These are France's recent, concrete actions, which once again go to show our
unequivocal commitment to disarmament. I would like to remind you that we are one
of the few States to have taken ambitious, irreversible disarmament action in the past
15 years. We have dismantled our ground-to-ground component, our nuclear test site
and our facilities for the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons.
I will come back to this point in more detail when we address the disarmament
segment.
6. We have also taken action with the other nuclear-weapon States.
As you know, we invited our partners to the first follow-up meeting to the NPT
Review Conference in Paris in July 2011. Following London in September 2009, the
Pg met for the second time at this political level to address a much denser, longer
agenda, largely covering the sphere of disarmament and non-proliferation questions.
This vitally important P5 consultation process shows the determination of the
nuclear-weapon States to continue to take concrete actions to fully comply with their
commitments to the three NPT pillars across the entire review cycle. Rounded out as
it is by regular technical consultations on subjects such as nuclear terminology and
verification, this process helps improve transparency and confidence within the Pg
and with respect to the non-nuclear-weapon States. Pg's unanimous agreement to
meet again in Washington in June is commendable as a further demonstration of our
shared will to be fully up to the mark in 2015. France intends to actively contribute to
this.
7. We have finalised discussions with the ASEAN countries to implement a protocol
to the Bangkok Treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South-East Asia
following three rounds of talks in Geneva, New York and Bali. We hope that the
protocol can now be signed without delay.
Mr Chairman, Dear Colleagues, 
8. This shows that the particular responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States,
especially in disarmament, will not be eluded, certainly not by France. Yet the success
of the Action Plan, including in disarmament, depends on everyone.
In this respect, we welcome Indonesia's ratification of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban
Treaty and call on all the States that have not yet done so, especially the
Annex 2 States, to follow this example.
The appointment of a host country and a facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko Laajava, to
hold the 2012 Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems is an
important step towards the implementation of the 1995 resolution, both for the
region's players and for all the countries that set great store by this treaty. We need to
continue to work together on the conditions that will enable the planned 2012
conference to be held with all the players concerned and in the most favourable
conditions. France fully supported the preparations for the European Union's
seminar on this issue, which we attended, and the IAEA forum in November 2011.
We deeply regret that negotiations for a fissile material cut-off treaty have not yet
been able to get underway at the Conference on Disarmament, despite the clear, firm
wish expressed by all the States party to the treaty and the laudable efforts made by
the successive presidencies. We should look at how best to drive forward this process
on the basis of document CD/1864 adopted in 2009.
Mr Chairman, Dear Colleagues,
9. The main challenge to the treaty's integrity in this new review cycle is the
continuation and even escalation of the proliferation crises, which cannot remain
without a response.
Granted, there are positive elements to be found as regards strengthening the global
non-proliferation regime. We have seen further ratifications of the Additional
Protocol, a ten-year extension on the 1540 Committee's mandate and the NSG's
adoption of new guidelines on transfers of enrichment and reprocessing technologies.
Nevertheless, the strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, and especially the
IAEA safeguards system, remains a priority. The persistence and possible escalation
of the proliferation crises is a subject of immense concern and calls for a firm
response from us.
These crises are more than a threat to regional and international security. By sapping
mutual confidence, they hinder the development of civil nuclear co-operation and
hold up progress with disarmament. And they touch the very substance of the
agreement contained in the NPT.
10. The Iranian crisis, first of all. For far too many years now, Iran has been pursuing
an enrichment programme without any credible civil purpose, in violation of the
United Nations Security Council resolutions and IAEA Board of Governors
resolutions. As shown by the latest IAEA reports, the situation is continuing to
worsen on the ground : acceleration of enrichment activities, in particular, to 20% on 
the Fordo site long concealed from the international community, continuation of
heavy water activities, and no progress with clarifying unanswered issues about the
possible military dimensions set out in the annex to the IAEA's November 2011
report.
The Group of Six met in Istanbul on 14 April to resume discussions with Iran about
its nuclear programme. The Six again presented a united front in their determination
to hold serious talks with Iran to secure answers from the country to the international
community's concerns over the nature of its programme and full compliance with its
international obligations. The principle of a further meeting was agreed upon, The
coming discussions will be important : Iran must urgently make tangible moves to
establish confidence, in keeping with the resolutions on this country adopted by the
UN Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
11. Turning to the North Korean crisis, the situation continues to be extremely
worrying. The two nuclear tests that North Korea claimed to have conducted have
been condemned by the international community. The November 2010 revelations of
the existence of a uranium enrichment facility, in blatant violation of resolutions 1718
and 1874, have merely added to our concerns over the North Korean nuclear
programme. The launch on 13 April this year, which we firmly condemn, constitutes a
further North Korean violation of its international obligations, by virtue of which it
should refrain from any activity associated with a ballistic missile programme. It is
time for this country to get back on track to dialogue and full legality by completely,
verifiably and irreversibly dismantling its nuclear programme, as demanded by
United Nations Security Council resolutions 1718 and 1874. It should, without delay,
allow the IAEA inspectors back into the country, giving them access to all its nuclear
facilities, cease all proliferation activity and again refrain from making any move that
could further add to tension in the region.
12. Lastly, regarding Syria, and in line with the resolution adopted by the Board of
Governors in June 2011 on the basis of the IMA report, we urge Damas to fully cooperate
with the Agency and shed full light on its past and present nuclear activities.
13. I will reiterate here the importance that France attaches to the question of
withdrawal. My country naturally fully adheres to this right established by Article X
of the NPT. Yet we need to limit abuses of this right. France would like to pursue
discussions on the consequences of withdrawal and on the principles designed to
organise the international community's response in the event of a notification of
withdrawal. It is vital, in particular, for a State to remain fully responsible for NPT
violations committed before its withdrawal.
14. On the subject of peaceful uses of civil nuclear energy, my country chose and
confirms its choice of nuclear energy so as not to forego this energy's capacities to
address the challenges of climate change, growing energy needs and medical
research, in particular. France is prepared to help all its partners who seek to embark
on the responsible development of civil nuclear energy, provided they scrupulously
comply with their international non-proliferation obligations. This implies from them
a commitment to safety and security, as stressed by the President of the French
Republic at the International Conference on Access to Civil Nuclear Energy held in
Paris in March 2010. Training is key to transmitting both these skills and a real
culture in that field. This is why we set up the International Institute of Nuclear 
Energy (I2EN) in 2011, in association with nuclear safety and security education and
training players, to spread the best education possible in this area.
15. The Fukushima events, caused by an extraordinary natural disaster, reminded us
of the importance of promoting and using, as we have always advocated, the highest
safety standards and the need to further scale up international co-operation. France
naturally supports the IAEA action plan adopted by the 55th General Conference in
June 2011 to strengthen nuclear safety worldwide and actively contributes to its
implementation. In preparation for this important step, France held in Paris an
international ministerial seminar on safety with 33 States in June 2011 in close cooperation
with the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency. We also champion the creation of
an international rapid response mechanism under the auspices of the IAEA to pool
resources and expertise available at the national level and quickly mobilize them in
the event of a nuclear accident. The networking of national training centres for crisis
management, under the supervision of the IAEA, in order to exchange best national
practices, is also the means to prepare efficiently for managing nuclear accidents.
16. A great deal of progress has been made with nuclear security, before and after the
Seoul Summit. In line with the commitments announced at the Washington Summit,
France has overhauled and strengthened its legislative and regulatory mechanism to
effectively combat theft, misuse and any malicious use of nuclear material and
facilities. We have also striven to lead by example by requesting the IAEA to conduct
an IPPAS (International Physical Protection Advisory Service) mission last year to
assess the French nuclear physical protection system and its implementation in one
of our nuclear plants. The final report rates the French nuclear security regime as
robust. We are pursuing work with the IAEA on identifying all disused radioactive
sources of French origin around the world and securing those with potentially serious
radiological repercussions in the event of an accident or malicious act. Last but not
least, we are conducting a responsible highly enriched uranium minimisation policy.
This policy duly factors in prevailing technical and economic feasibility conditions,
and is designed to preserve the fundamental interests of research and prevent the
risks of global shortages in the crucial supply of medical radioisotopes.
For France, safety, security and non-proliferation are the three conditions of the
responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
17. To conclude, France will see this first Preparatory Committee as successful if we
manage to hold honest, sincere discussions on these subjects. We hope very much
that the discussions on procedural issues would be completed quickly, through
aligning them with the procedures used for the last cycle. You can count on my
support and my delegation's support to help you in your task.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. 