hird Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear NonProliferation
Treaty Review Conference
(New-York, 28 April- 09 May 2014)
Statement by Mr Jean-Hugues Simon-Michel
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of France
to the Conference on Disarmament
Head of the French Delegation
"GENERAL DEBATE"
Mr Chair, Dear Colleagues,
Allow me to begin by congratulating you on your appointment as Chair of the
Conference.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the cornerstone of the
international non-proliferation regime. Its consolidation requires the full
implementation of the Action Plan adopted by consensus in 2010. This sets out a
progressive approach balanced between the three pillars. It is the only realistic and
effective way forward.
Mr Chair,
Over the past year. some progress has been made in dealing with the crises of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. but much
remains to be done.
North Korea is continuing to pursue the development of its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes. In particular, the DPRK has carried out work on various nuclear
installations in Yongbyon, in violation of its international obligations. In the last few
weeks, North Korea has fired a number of ballistic missiles, including two mediumrange
missiles, and has announced that it would launch a new type of nuclear test. We
call upon North Korea to resume dialogue without delay in order to dismantle its
existing nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner, and to refrain from any action which might increase tension in
the region.
5 
As far as the discussions on the Iranian nuclear pr
We have also made progress on the matter of nuclear-weapon-free zones. I was
granted full powers from the President of the French Republic to sign during this 2014
PrepCom the protocol to the Semipalatinsk Treaty on the Central Asian NuclearWeapon-Free
Zone after two years discussions. We have signed two parallel
declarations with Mongolia on the nuclear-weapon-free status of this country. We
hope the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone can be signed as soon as possible. For our part, we are ready to do so. Concerning
the Middle Eastern region, our objective remains the holding of a conference on the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, and their delivery systems. We have every confidence in the facilitator Mr
jaakko Laajava for the achievement of this objective at the earliest possible date.
Multilaterally, our priority is to move forward on the matter of a Fissile Material CutOff
Treaty (FMCT). We would have preferred to enter directly into negotiations at the
Conference on Disarmament. Failing this, the discussions held at the beginning of the
month in the Group of Governmental Experts, set up by Resolution 67/53, have in our
view been highly useful and provide an excellent basis for the next session of the GGE
that will take place next August. We are convinced that these discussions will provide a
better understanding of the respective positions and we hope that they will lead
ultimately to concrete and relevant recommendations.
Mr Chair,
The objective of a world without nuclear weapons cannot be decreed in the
abstract, without taking the international strategic context into account.
The conditions for the achievement of a world without nuclear weapons must be the
outcome of gradual and collective work, guided by concrete measures. Undermining
existing forums such as this one, by creating parallel processes, and calling into
question the step-by-step approach of the 2010 Action Plan, as certain recent
initiatives do, will not advance nuclear disarmament. Quite the contrary.
Mr Chair,
All States which scrupulously meet their international obligations and pursue civil
nuclear programmes in good faith must be able to benefit from the peaceful
applications of the atom.
In 2013, the prospects for growth of the civil nuclear energy sector in the coming years
have been confirmed. In this context, France reaffirms its commitment to responsible
development of nuclear energy that is to say in compliance with the highest standards
of safety, security and non-proliferation. It is essential to pursue international
cooperation, in particular with regard to training. France particularly welcomes the
holding in Vienna next May of the IAEA international conference on this topic.
7 
The IAEA plays a key role in the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. We
support the actions whose goal is the continued strengthening of the safeguards
system, in particular the further development of the application of the safeguards at
the State level. We believe that, in order to achieve the goals set up in Article 111.1 of the
NPT, verification should be based on the implementation of a comprehensive
safeguards agreement and an additional protocol. France calls on all states that have
not yet done so to ratify and implement them as soon as possible.
Regarding nuclear safety, several more years will be necessary to draw all the lessons
from the Fukushima accident. Nonetheless, we already have an action plan, from the
IAEA, which we are implementing with scrupulous care. Indeed, we are circulating an
update to our national version of this action plan during this PrepCom. We wish to
draw your attention to two issues of major importance for us:
The development and generalization of international peer review missions and
undertakings by States to accept at least one OSART mission by the end of 2014
and to publish their conclusions;
The establishment of a Global Regime of Civil Nuclear Liability, to which we
have contributed this year by signing a Joint Statement with the United States.
We continue to call upon all concerned States to accede to the strengthened
international instruments in this area.
Regarding nuclear security, France wishes this year to draw attention to the need to
strengthen the protection of radioactive sources in order to provide the same
conditions of safety and security as those that exist for nuclear materials. That is why
the President of the Republic announced an initiative at the Summit in The Hague
which notably calls for the formation of a group of suppliers of high-activity
radioactive sources. We shall return to this subject in the specialized segment.
Mr Chair,
I would like to end to finish by saying a word on the situation in Ukraine. France
condemns the violation of the sovereignty of Ukraine and its territorial integrity. The
actions by Russia are contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and the
undertakings given in the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 adopted in connection with
Ukraine's accession to the NPT. In this sense, these actions obviously have a very
negative impact.
You can count on my support, and that of my delegation, to assist you in your task. 