
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT)
 (New York, 27 April - 22 May 2015)
Statement by Mr Jean-Hugues Simon-Michel
Permanent Representative of France to the Conference on Disarmament
April 28, 2015
General debate
Madam President,
I would like to offer you my warmest congratulations on your election as President of this Review
Conference and assure you of France's full support.
Allow me first of all to address to our Nepalese colleagues and to the authorities and the people of
Nepal our sincere condolences and the emotion and solidarity of the people of France for the loss and
the suffering caused by the earthquake in their country.
France aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union.
Madam President,
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The NPT makes an essential contribution to international peace and security. This is what France
sincerely believes and this is why France hopes that all States Parties will forcefully reaffirm their
support for the Treaty. We remain fully convinced of the need to build on the success of 2010. The
Action Plan adopted by consensus in 2010 contains a long-term collective ambition to move forward in
all areas of the Treaty. We must maintain this ambition.
Madam President,
I would like to highlight some recent developments: 
6
- In the field of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the preliminary understanding on the
parameters of an agreement with Iran, reached in Lausanne on 2 April by France and its E3+3
partners, is an important step forward. This step must now become a robust, sustainable and
verifiable agreement with Iran by 30 June. France will be very vigilant on this point.
Unfortunately, other crises have worsened, particularly in North Korea which has carried out
another nuclear test since the last Review Conference and which is continuing its nuclear and
ballistic programmes in violation of the Security Council resolutions. Finally, the Syrian nuclear
programme remains to be clarified.
We hope that this Conference will enable to make progress and it will draw on the lessons from
the regional crises to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, as well as to respond to the abuse
of the right to withdraw from the Treaty, which has been a threat to our community for over 10
years.
- I believe that it is important to welcome here the successful discussions of the Group of
Governmental Experts on an FMCT3
, which report was adopted by consensus at the beginning
of this month. This issue is one of the priorities of my country, as well as the entry into force of
the CTBT as soon as possible4
. I would like to acknowledge the work accomplished by the
provisional technical Secretariat of the OTICE.
- In the field of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, progress is made at every Review Conference.
After Fukushima, the responsible development of civilian nuclear energy relies on the
strengthening of nuclear safety and on the development of accident-response capabilities, but
also on training "civilian nuclear elites".
Madam President,
France is fully committed to implementing its commitments under the Treaty and under the 2010
Action Plan, which remains our roadmap. I would like to highlight a few actions which show France's
sincere, constant and ambitious commitment:
- In the area of non-proliferation, as I said, France takes an active part in negotiations with Iran.
- As regards disarmament, France shares the long-term objective of eliminating nuclear weapons,
when the circumstances so allow. It has consistently demonstrated this objective over the past
15 years by halving its total weapons stockpile and dismantling its nuclear test site and fissilematerial
production facilities for weapons. These are not mere words - these are actions with
irreversible consequences for France. But the ultimate objective of elimination cannot be
declared abstractly, without taking into account the international strategic context. It can only

3
Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty
4
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. 
7
be reached through a series of concrete measures, step by step. To do this, since disarmament
requires trust and reciprocity, the President of the French Republic announced new transparency
measures in February and solemnly reaffirmed our negative security assurances to non-nuclear
weapons States in compliance with their non-proliferation obligations.
France is fully aware of the severe effects of nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons cannot be used
as battlefield weapons. French nuclear deterrence is purely defensive and strictly limited to
defending its vital interests under extreme circumstances of self-defence. French nuclear
deterrence is in full compliance with international law.
- To maintain the momentum of the remarkable GGE discussions on the FMCT, we have
submitted a draft treaty to the Conference on Disarmament. It is an ambitious project which sets
out a framework to allow irreversible measures to be taken. We must begin this negotiation
without delay to prohibit access to the basic material needed for nuclear weapons. This is the
next logical step in multilateral disarmament.
Finally, we have acted together, with our P5 partners. We have set up a regular consultation
process to build trust. We have together drawn up a form for our national reports. We have
compiled a joint glossary.
France has ratified the Treaty establishing a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia.
Naturally, France supports the objective of a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons
of Mass Destruction in the Middle East.
- As regards civilian nuclear energy, a few weeks ago, France set out a new initiative on a
priority issue, i.e. increasing international training, mainly for countries accessing to nuclear
energy.
Madam President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
At a time of serious threats to world stability, the NPT is an indispensable tool to protect our security
interests. At a time when all of us are in a crucial fight against climate change, the Treaty also lays the
foundations for mutually-beneficial cooperation offering access to a significant source of decarbonated
energy, i.e. civilian nuclear energy. It is essential for our future that we strengthen the Treaty. We look
forward to working on that goal with all of you during this Conference, in a spirit of consensus. 