1
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY!
Statement
by Susanne Baumann,
Head of the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany
and
Deputy Federal Government Commissioner for
Disarmament and Arms Control
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Vienna 2 – 12 May 2017
2
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, please let me congratulate you to your election
to the Chair and assure you of my delegation’s full support
and cooperation. I would also like to align myself with the
Statements to be delivered by the European Union and the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
As we begin this new Review Cycle with its first Preparatory
Committee, we are faced with many challenges to
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation which require
swift and determined responses:
We are first and foremost appalled by North Korea’s
relentless and illegal quest for nuclear weapons, regardless of
the suffering of its population cut off from the outside world,
making it one of the biggest proliferation crises that the
international community is faced with to date and
threatening regional stability and international peace and
security. Germany condemns the DPRK’s nuclear and ballistic
missile activities in breach of international law in the
strongest possible terms and calls upon Pjöngjang to
immediately stop its illegal actions and fully comply with its
obligations under all relevant UNSC resolutions. Ultimately, a
comprehensive solution fully addressing all concerns about
the DPRK’s illegal nuclear and ballistic missile activities will
require talks about the DPRK’s programmes and should be 
3
fully based on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as
the cornerstone of the international disarmament and nonproliferation
architecture. In this context, Germany calls upon
all States still outside the NPT to join the Treaty as NonNuclear
Weapon States.
Mr. Chairman,
The threatening development of North Korea’s nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes strongly highlights
the fact that nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament do not take place in a security vacuum, but
must be assessed in the context of the current security
situation. Europe is equally faced with major challenges to its
security architecture especially since the illegal annexation of
Crimea by Russia and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
Moreover, the ongoing disastrous war in Syria sadly shows
that even the long-standing taboo of using Weapons of Mass
Destruction as a means of warfare has been repeatedly
broken. The international community must make all efforts to
hold those responsible for the use of chemical weapons in
Syria accountable. In this regard, we fully support the OPCW
and the ongoing work of its fact-finding mission as well as the
OPCW-UN Joint Investigative Mechanism.
4
Let’s be clear: There is no easy answer as to how to respond
to the current major security challenges. With respect to
nuclear arms control and non proliferation, we have even
gone through times of intensive debate as to whether nuclear
weapons should be prohibited instantly to make this world
safer. These issues were also thoroughly discussed in the
Open-ended Working Group on Nuclear Disarmament last
year in Geneva.
While many NPT members in this room have now embarked
on negotiations of a legally-binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons, others, like Germany, remain skeptical of
such negotiations. We are convinced that concrete nuclear
disarmament with real security gains cannot be achieved by
negotiating a declaratory nuclear weapons prohibition. Only
concrete, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament
steps involving the active participation of nuclear weapons’
states can help to achieve the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free
world in line with Article VI of the NPT and ultimately make
this world a safer place. Germany is fully committed to this
goal.
That’s why Germany, together with its partners from the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), remains
strongly committed to promote implementation of the 2010
NPT Action Plan and its multiple proposals to advance
implementation of the NPT. 
5
Mr. Chairman,
We welcome the steps that have already been taken, in
particular the substantial reductions of the global stockpiles
of nuclear warheads since the end of the Cold War. However,
there are still too many nuclear weapons and much more can
be done to increase transparency of the remaining nuclear
arsenals. Germany calls for renewed dialogue and
understanding between the US and Russia to engage in new
disarmament talks, including talks about the future of the
New START Treaty. We will host a side-event on the current
state of strategic arms control presenting the results of the
trilateral US-Russian-German Deep Cuts-Commission this
afternoon at 5 pm.
Beyond the need for a continued bilateral disarmament
process between the two biggest possessor states, many
elements of the 2010 Action Plan can only be implemented
through a successful multilateral effort. We want to see the
CTBT enter into force. Germany is therefore engaged in the
“Friends of the CTBT” which aims at bringing forward speedy
entry-into-force of the CTBT.
Negotiations on an FMCT are long overdue. That’s why
Germany, together with Canada and the Netherlands, cosponsored
a General Assembly resolution launching a new
process of diplomatic efforts towards an FMCT, setting out a
high-level FMCT expert preparatory group. Thereby, we aim 
6
to overcome the long stalemate in the CD in Geneva. We feel
reassured about our approach by the substantive discussions
on the issue which took place in New York in March and
would like to encourage all countries to follow the discussions
closely. The co-sponsors stand ready to facilitate a continuous
and transparent flow of information on the issue.
Moreover, a robust and credible verification regime of
concrete nuclear disarmament measures which would help to
establish confidence is needed. This includes our active role
in the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
Verification Initiative (IPNDV). From 6 to 8 March, Germany
for the first time hosted a working group meeting of the
IPNDV in Berlin.
All of these measures presuppose trust between partners and
a cooperative setting based on reciprocity. This is also true
with regard to the so-called Negative Security Assurances,
which suffered a heavy blow after the breach of the Budapest
Memorandum by Russia, which guaranteed the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. Germany thinks that we should use this
Review Cycle to strengthen existing security guarantees
which are meant to protect Non-Nuclear Weapon States.
Negative Security Assurances should become part of a
binding treaty-regime, and thus contribute even more than
today to improving the security environment of an
overwhelming majority of countries. 
7
Mr. Chairman,
Germany is convinced that the NPT is a very successful treaty
which has strengthened the principle of non-proliferation and
prevented many countries from pursuing nuclear options.
The best example is the diplomatic solution agreed between
the E3/EU+3 and Iran in July 2015, the JCPoA, which is built
on the NPT and its strict verification mechanisms exercised by
the IAEA. Germany believes that continued strict
implementation of the JCPoA by all parties based on full
respect for the NPT is the best way forward to fully
addressing the international community’s concerns about the
exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme.
Mr. Chairman,
Turning to the third pillar of the NPT, for Germany it is
essential to underline that all three pillars of the Treaty are
interrelated and mutually reinforcing. The inalienable right of
state parties to the peaceful use of nuclear energy is assured
under Art. IV of the NPT and this is a major reason why a
functioning Treaty is benefitting all of us. In its essence, the
third pillar is a matter of trust. Those who do not opt for the
use of nuclear energy must be assured that those who do
maintain the highest standards of nuclear safety and security. 
8
Germany commends the IAEA for its crucial and invaluable
work regarding the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including
through its safeguards-system. Germany is, at present, the
fourth largest contributor to the IAEA’s budget and has been
operating its IAEA safeguards support programme for more
than 35 years. Germany calls upon all States who have not
yet done so to adopt the IAEA’s Additional Protocol and on all
members to remain committed to the ongoing
implementation of safeguards as well as appropriate and
effective levels of nuclear safety and security.
Maintaining satisfactory levels of nuclear security is a truly
global challenge, because the threat of nuclear terrorism has
reached global dimensions. No one should assume that the
threat only concerns those who actually use nuclear energy.
Terrorism does not respect borders. So-called failed states
add to the risks of nuclear materials falling out of regulatory
control.
The Nuclear Security Summit process has drawn global
attention to these challenges. Germany contributed to the
process in the field of improving security of radioactive
sources and the protection from cyber attacks against nuclear
facilities. Much work needs still to be done. We welcome the
IAEA’s readiness to fulfill its central role with respect to
nuclear security and hope that the momentum can be
maintained also in the NPT context.
9
Mr. Chairman,
The current challenges to nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
might be difficult to address. But they certainly
also clarify the areas where the NPT needs strengthening and
perhaps reform to become an even more successful
international regime. On the basis of this assessment, mindful
of the general objectives of the Treaty, the Preparatory
Committee should make recommendations on areas where
further action is required with a view to turning this new
Review Cycle into a success story for the NPT.
The German delegation stands ready to work with all parties
to this end.
Thank you. 