. I Permanent Mission
of the Federal Republic of Germany
to the United Nations
New York
Statement by
Ambassador Michael Biontino
During the General Debate of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Third Session, New York, 28 April- 9 May 2014
Wednesday, April 30, 2014
1 

•
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset let me congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, on the
election to the chair of the 3rd session of the Preparatory
Committee of the 2015 Review Conference. Mr. Chairmen,
you can count on the full support of my delegation in your
difficult task. Indeed, the success of the forthcoming Review
Conference will very much depend on the work we will have
to carry out under your able chairmanship.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to align myself with the
Statements delivered by the European Union and the NonProliferation
and Disarmament Initiative.
From Germany's point of view, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. This Treaty
has greatly contributed to making the world a safer place!
Germany calls upon all States still outside the NPT to join the
Treaty as Non-Nuclear Weapon States.
In this context, Germany recalls that the so-called BudapestMemorandum
was instrumental in paving the way for
Ukraine and other newly independent States to renounce
nuclear arsenals inherited from the SU. It is regrettable that
the Russian Federation has not honoured its obligations
towards Ukraine enshrined in the Budapest memorandum as
shown by recent events.
It is understandable that there is a tendency at preparatory
meetings to focus more on the deficits of the Treaty regime
2 
~--------- ------ ---------- ~~~~~~~~~--- - ~
than on its benefits. Nevertheless, we should not forget that
the Treaty facilitates, on a daily basis, peaceful cooperation in
nuclear matters, mostly thanks to the IAEA. Furthermore,
States in compliance with the NPT enjoy negative Security
Assurances, which are meant to protect Non-Nuclear
Weapon States. Negative Security Assurances should become
part of a binding treaty-regime, and thus contribute even
more than today to improving the security environment of an
overwhelming majority of countries.
It is common knowledge that the three pillars of the NPT are
intrinsically intertwined. The NPT-Action Plan from 2010 is
also based on a similar comprehensive approach. Against this
backdrop, Germany agrees: The Action Plan is implemented
at a pace that is far too slow.
With regard to nuclear disarmament, Germany is convinced
that further progress is needed to achieve the goal of a
nuclear-weapon-free world in line with Article VI of the NPT.
While Germany is firmly committed to its obligations as
member of the North Atlantic Alliance, it is resolved to help
create the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons in
accordance with the goals of the NPT. Within this context, a
new disarmament round between the United States of
America and the Russian Federation should begin as soon as
possible and it should address substrategic nuclear weapons
as well.
3 
•
In line with the NPT Action Plan, all Nuclear Weapons States
should increase transparency with respect to their arsenals.
Germany would like to reiterate that the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty must finally enter into force. In the 21st century,
there is no space for nuclear tests.
In this context we cannot but deplore North Korea's
aggressive nuclear policy, including the specter of a fourth
detonation of a nuclear device.
Besides, negotiations on a Treaty prohibiting the production
of fissile material for nuclear weapons should begin in the
very near future. As the Conference on Disarmament (CD)
moves into its 18th consecutive year of stalemate, Germany
is concerned about the CO's functionality as the sole
permanent multilateral disarmament treaty negotiating body.
The CO's ability to address the security needs of the
international community is in serious doubt.
With regard to non-proliferation, Germany is actively
involved in finding a diplomatic solution to the current
proliferation crises, which could jeopardise the integrity of
the Treaty. Germany welcomes the positive momentum with
respect to the negotiations with Iran and hopes that a
permanent solution can be found until this summer. This
would underline the role of the NPT as an indispensable
stabilizing element in international relations.
Germany commends the crucial and valuable work done by
the IAEA and its safeguards-system. As of today, Germany is
4 
the third largest contributor to the IAEA's budget and is
operating an IAEA support programme for more than 35
years. Germany also calls upon all States who have not yet
done so to adopt the IAEA's Additional Protocol. In this
respect, while some progress has been achieved over the last
years there is still room for improvement in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency. Germany recalls the offer by the
NPDI to provide advice upon a State's request when
implementing the Additional Protocol. It is active in the area
of nuclear security and has joined all pertinent instruments
designed to help preventing nuclear terrorism and reduce
nuclear risks. Also, Germany stands ready to continue
international co-operation with all interested partners on
export control policies in order to close all remaining
loopholes which allow illegal networks to traffic with
proliferation-sensitive materials.
Finally, Germany deeply regrets that the Helsinki-Conference
on a Zone free of weapons of Mass Destruction has not yet
been convened. Germany is supporting the tireless work of
the Facilitator and hopes that the Conference can be
convened until the end of this year.
To sum up: the NPT is an indispensable Treaty, improving
security and cooperation. Germany stands ready to work with
all parties towards the goal of strengthening the Treaty.
5 