CHECK AGA NST DEL VERY
Statement
by Susanne Baumann,
Head of the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany
and
Deputy Federal Government Commissioner for
Disarmament and Arms Control
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Comrmttee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Geneva, 23 April 2019
1
Mr Chairman
p ease et me congratulate you to your election to the Chair
and assure you of Germany's fu support and cooperation [
would also like to align myself w th the Statements to be
delivered by the European Un on and the Non Proliferation
and Disarmament Initiative ]
th
As we approach the NPT's 50 anniversary th s year, t s h gh
t me to take a step back from the challenges and realities of
the 21s' century and remind ourselves of the huge historic
contribution of the NPT to peace and security worldwide
What began n 1968 w th the signing of the Non Proliferation
Treaty, has evolved over time into a so d, sophisticated and
successful nuclear non proliferation and disarmament reg me
wh ch has achieved ts goal n preventing a spread of nuclear
weapons and d scouraging many states from pursuing nuclear
apt OnS
Germany deep y values the NPT for hav ng anchored the
pr nc p e of non proliferation n international security policy
Over t me, we a have strengthened the NPT by signing up
and implementing nuclear safeguards to prevent the
drivers on of nuclear mater a We encourage a NPT members
to use th s Review Cycle to even further strengthen the nonproliferation reg me by promoting the Additional Protocol,
together w th Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements, as the
go d standard of nuclear safeguards
2
However, it cannot be denied that the non-proliferation
regime is currently faced with many challenges: North Korea's
illegal quest for nuclear weapons remains the biggest proliferation
crisis to date and a huge threat to international peace
and security. While we need to counter to the challenges the
DPRK's nuclear and ballistic missile programmes pose to the
NPT, we should strongly support ongoing diplomatic efforts
aimed at finding a way out of this nuclear crisis, including
through maintaining the pressure campaign. Ultimately, a
diplomatic solution will have to comprise concrete, verifiable
and irreversible steps leading to denuclearization and an
unequivocal return of the DPRK to the NPT as the
cornerstone of the international disarmament and nonproliferation
architecture. In this context, Germany calls upon
all States still outside the NPT to join the Treaty as NonNuclear
Weapon States.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed between the
E3/EU+3 and Iran shows that it is possible to arrive at
comprehensive diplomatic solutions for major nuclear
proliferation crises. The JCPoA ensures that Iran's nuclear
programme can only serve peaceful purposes based on
restrictions of Iran's nuclear programme as well as the
strictest IAEA monitoring and verification regime in the world.
3
Germany stands firmly committed to the preservation and
continued full and effective implementation of the JCPoA by
all participants.
These days, the dangers of proliferation are also real when it
comes to other Weapons of Mass Destruction. We are
appalled by the repeated use of chemical weapons in5,
thereby breaking the long-standing taboo of not using
Weapons of Mass Destruction as a means of warfare. There
cannot be impunity for those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere.
We are concerned about other violations of existing arms
control agreements and the new attractiveness of nuclear
weapons in other parts of the world as well:
US-Russian nuclear arms control has been at the backbone
for all efforts to reduce and restrict nuclear armament for
many years and yielded major security benefits, in particular
for Europe. We are deeply concerned about Russia's obvious
disregard for arms control agreements while at the same
time seeking new conventional as well as nuclear military
capabilities. We call on Russia to allay all doubts regarding its
compliance with the INF treaty and on the US and Russia to
do everything to continue their dialogue including on
strategic stability. Germany will host a side-event on the
current state of strategic arms control presenting the results
and recommendations of the trilateral US-Russian-German
Deep Cuts-Commission on May, 2nd.
4
Because of the current security situation and the threat to
non-proliferation Germany pursues an ambitious nuclear
disarmament agenda. We are convinced that not only
defense and deterrence but also disarmament and arms
control can contribute to our all security.
To come closer to our collective goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons we call on Washington and Moscow to
further reduce their nuclear arsenals and to start negotiations
on the prolongation of the New START Treaty being well
aware that this requires first and foremost trust and full
compliance with the existing treaties.
There are other elements, political and technical ones, which
could help improve the framework for any future
disarmament steps, bilateral as well as multilateral ones:
A prohibition on producing Fissile Material for weapons
would be a major breakthrough strengthening both effective
non-proliferation as well as contributing, at least over time,
to nuclear disarmament. That is why Germany, together with
Canada and the Netherlands, initiated a new High-level FMCT
Expert Group which strives to prepare and advance the
beginning of real negotiations of an FMCT.
We also want to see the CTBT enter into force and see much
value in the work of the IMS to detect nuclear tests: for sure
now, but also in a distant future when the CTBTO would still
be needed to monitor the absence of atomic testing even in a
nuclear-weapons free world.
5
Moreover, a robust and credible verification regime of
concrete nuclear disarmament measures is needed. We are
actively engaged in the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament Verification Initiative (IPNDV) as in other
international efforts aimed at devising instruments for
nuclear disarmament verification.
All of these measures presuppose trust between Partners and
a cooperative setting based on reciprocity. This is also true
with regard to the so-called Negative Security Assurances
which have played an important role in establishing
confidence in the nuclear non-proliferation regime and in
diminishing the role and prominence of nuclear weapons in
national doctrines. Germany thinks that after the breach of
the Budapest Memorandum by Russia in connection with its
illegal annexation of Crimea it would be timely to take a
fresh look at these assurances and discuss whether Negative
Security Assurances should not be reaffirmed and possibly
strengthened in order to increase the role they can play for
the credibility and legitimacy of the non-proliferation regime
as such.
Together with our partners from the Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), Germany remains committed
to promoting these and other concrete steps in order to
advance implementation of the NPT across all its three pillars
which are interrelated and mutually reinforcing.
6
Finally, on the third pillar of the NPT, mutual trust is of
paramount importance: The right to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes is a precondition for the worldwide
acceptance of the Treaty. Although there are many benefits
of peaceful uses, it has also become clear that the use of
nuclear energy involves considerable risks, They concern all
of us. Those who do not opt for the use of nuclear energy
must be assured that those who do maintain the
standards in nuclear safety and security and a rigid
application of safeguards.
Germany commends the IAEA for its crucial and invaluable
work regarding the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including
through its safeguards-system. Germany is, at present, the
fourth largest contributor to the IAEA's budget and has been
operating its IAEA safeguards support programme for 40
years. Germany is also a major voluntary contributor to the
Nuclear Security Fund.
Nuclear security is a truly global challenge since the threat of
nuclear terrorism has reached global dimensions.
The Nuclear Security Summit process has drawn global
attention to these challenges. They require our continued
attention and action, not only on a national scale, but also in
the framework of the relevant international bodies and
organizations, with the IAEA in its central coordinating role.
The deteriorating security environment, the erosion of our
arms control and non-proliferation architecture which was a
7
guard an of peace and security for many decades, the
emergence of new technologies and threats with implications
for warfare wh ch we cannot even oversee today a th s
makes t even more important to do everything to defend
and strengthen the NPT
The Preparatory Committee should make recommendations
on areas where further act on s required with a v ew to
turning th s new Review Cycle into a success story for the
NPT
The German de egat on stands ready to work with a part es
to th s end
Thank you
8