Allow me, at the outset, to extend to you the warmest congratulations of the Greek Government, on your election to the Presidency of the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are particularly pleased, that your outstanding diplomatic skills and profound knowledge of the subject, will contribute to the successful outcome of our work.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, in his capacity as President of the European Union, delivered a statement on behalf of the European Union and its Member-States. My Government subscribes entirely to its content. However, I would like to avail myself of this opportunity, to briefly refer to the great importance Greece attaches to the Treaty of Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. President,
Greece is among the first signatory States Parties to the NPT and attaches great importance to this Treaty.
We believe that NPT lays a solid foundation upon which nuclear disarmament efforts are being built, while in the same time, provides a framework for international cooperation on the issue of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We are convinced that a balanced approach to NPT, is indispensable and we shall commit our efforts, to accomplishing all goals targeted by this treaty. We fully share deep concerns of the international community, for the dangers of nuclear proliferation to global security including nuclear terrorism. In pursuing this goal, the international community has developed a number of important devices aiming at securing compliance with the Treaty. IAEA's Additional Protocol, arrangements and regimes for controlling transfers and exports of technologies and equipment (including dual use goods) were set to provide the necessary tools for verification. Proliferation security arrangements (PSI) have been developed, while International legal framework was enhanced through UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
We shall steadily promote universalization of NPT and of all multilateral agreements related to weapons of mass destruction. We shall foster our efforts to convince all states to consider IAEA's Additional
Protocol as a standard safeguards system. Nuclear materials, ballistic missiles and other materials that can be used for weapons of mass destruction must be placed under effective international control. We believe that regimes controlling these transfers must become more effective, with strengthened criteria and fully complied.
Greece, together with its partners in the EU, has a positive stand towards the idea of creation of a Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone in the Middle East. We also support the tightening of measures of non- proliferation in the Mediterranean region.
We endorse efforts undertaken to by France, Germany and the U.K, with the participation of the High Representative of PESC, aiming at convincing Iran to align itself with the expectations of the international community and encouraging this country to fully comply to all non- proliferation commitments under the IAEA provisions and to voluntarily suspend, in a verifiable manner, all its enrichment and reprocessing activities.
We are deeply concerned over the ongoing situation regarding developments related to DPRK's nuclear weaponization programme.
We share concerns of the international community since the announcement of their intention to withdraw from NPT, made by the government of the DPRK in January 2003.
We will support a negotiated settlement aiming to bring DPRK in full alignment with NPT and the Additional Protocol.
We urge the DPRK' s government, to demonstrate the necessary flexibility and good faith and positively respond to these efforts.
We hope the Conference to achieve progress in all the issues covered by this Treaty and to advance in the three pillars of the NPT, namely disarmament, non-proliferation, and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
The common position of the European Union, which has already been distributed to you, and to which we fully subscribe, reflects our position.
Thank you Mr. President
