PERMANENT MISSION CF GREECE
TO THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE & THE OTHER
INTER}JAT!ONAL ORGA.t"IIZATIONS
GENEVA
Mr. Chairman
At the outset allow me to congratulate you on the assumption of your duties
as Chairman of the Second Preparatory Committee meeting of the 2020 NPT
Review Conference and for the thorough preparation of this meeting. I assure
you for my delegation's full support.
Allow me also express my appreciation for the constructive guidance of the
Chair of the First Preparatory Committee, Amb. Henk Car van der Kwast.
Greece ful ly aligns herself to the preceded general statement delivered by
the E.U. and would like to further contribute, in my national capacity, few
remarks in form of a synthesis.
Mr. Chairman
First and foremost, we must strive to safeguard and reinforce the N.P.T., as it
is halfway in its current review - important and critical on many aspects -cycle
that will lead us to the 2020 Review Conference. The N.P.T. is, and rightly so,
the cornerstone of the global non - proliferation and disarmament
architecture.
There is no doubt about the importance to uphold the principle of
undiminished security for all and the fact that we bear witness to a 21st
century ever changing, increasingly diverse and challenging, global security
environment. This however should not prevent us from giving, prudently and
realistically, a new impetus to the interrelated pace of non - proliferation and
progressive disarmament. It is in this very undertaking to bolster the global
non - proliferation and disarmament architecture that we have to accelerate
efforts to an F.M.C.T. and a Nuclear Disarmament Verification framework.
Mr. Chairman
The catalyst encapsulating the holistic approach indicated above would be a
dialogue among nuclear weapon States and non - nuclear weapons States
that could significantly enhance any future nuclear arms reduction, leading
ultimately to complete nuclear disarmament.
This is the reason why we deem necessary to reiterate once more the
importance of the 2020 NPT Review Conference." 
We hope that the deliberations of the coming dates will further to narrow our
differences and contribute to building a safer world.
Thank you 