Allow me at the outset, to extend to you Mr. President, the warmest congratulations of the Greek Government, on your election to the Chair of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are particularly pleased that your outstanding diplomatic skills and profound knowledge of the subject, will contribute to the successful outcome of our work over the next four weeks.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Spain, on behalf of the President of the European Union, delivered a statement of the European Union and its Member-States. My Government subscribes entirely to its content. However, I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to briefly refer to the great importance Greece attaches to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. President,
Greece's commitment to Non-Proliferation is strong and unwavering. My country was among the first states to sign the NPT as well as other agreements furthering its goals and thus attaches great importance and places many hopes for a more secure world on it.
Forty years ago, the NPT established -and today its review process still provides us with- a solid foundation upon which the goals set by each of the three pillars of the Treaty - namely disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy- can be pursued and gradually accomplished in a balanced and mutually reinforcing manner.
On nuclear disarmament, we recently witnessed successful progress with the signing of the New START Treaty between the United States and the Russian Federation. This important development, with its global impact, establishes a promising foundation for further and proportional action. We hope that this agreement will open the way for deeper reductions in the future. We anticipate early ratification by its signatories.
In the same vein, we welcome the recently announced Nuclear Posture Review by the USA, which constitutes a promising step that will facilitate the advancement towards a world without nuclear weapons.
Other necessary steps towards nuclear disarmament include: (a) The early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; (b) The early commencement of substantive negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) banning the production of fissile materials; (c) The provision of security assurances to the non- nuclear weapon states, a step expected to greatly boost confidence and trust among NPT signatories; and, (d) The promotion of additional confidence building measures including the strengthening of existing Nuclear Weapons Free Zones and the establishment of new ones.
Greece has ratified the CTBT and calls for its early entry into force. The fruition of this long awaited goal will be an accomplishment of monumental value for our common efforts towards nuclear disarmament. We urge the nine states whose ratification is still required to redouble their efforts to complete the requirements.
The recently adopted UNSC Resolution 1887 (2009) regarding compliance with the NPT, reaffirms a comprehensive base for disarmament and non proliferation with the NPT which, in conjunction with the IAEA, is the cornerstone of international understanding on nuclear issues.
It is our steadfast belief that nuclear safeguards as implemented by the International Atomic Energy Agency is the best means we have at hand to deter, detect and prevent proliferation. Al! states ought to assist the IAEA in its work and play their part in strengthening the safeguards system. The best way to achieve this is by concluding and implementing the Additional Protocol to their Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements.
Strengthened safeguards, when combined with the implementation by all states of the provisions of UNSC Resolution 1540 (2004), provide a strong basis for a robust non- proliferation regime and for countering the threat of nuclear terrorism.
The proliferation challenges that the contemporary world faces constitute a serious threat for international security. Furthermore, proliferation destabilizes the institutional foundations of transparency and mutual trust towards the nuclear proliferation issues. We remain deeply concerned by the increasing rate of activities related to nuclear materials and ballistic missiles. We all witness these activities taking place in ways that jeopardize regional stability. Especially worrisome are developments and disclosures about such activities in the regions of Asia and the Middle East.
Greece steadily supports all efforts to promote the universalization of the NPT and all multilateral agreements related to weapons of mass destruction. To this end, we should increase our efforts and actively engage all those states that still need to be convinced. We deem as particularly useful that the IAEA Additional Protocol shall constitute the safeguards' verification standard. In effect we believe that nuclear materials, other materials that can be used as weapons of mass destruction, as well as ballistic missiles, must be placed under effective international control.
This Conference should give adequate attention to the issue of withdrawal from the NPT. Article X provides for a consignee this right, in extreme cases of threat to its national security. We shouldn't fail to recognize, that the consequences from such a withdrawal might have serious implications for regional and international stability, in particular when exercised mala fide by a state in non-compliance with its NPT obligations. As a result, modalities addressing this risk should be explored.
Special attention must be given to all the legal instruments, guidelines and best practices the IAEA promotes, in order to bolster nuclear safety and nuclear security features, in all kinds of peaceful nuclear activities. This is a sine qua non condition for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Greece supports the cautious peaceful use of nuclear energy, always in strict conformity with the obligations stemming by the NPT and their safeguards agreements. We pay special attention to the issue of nuclear waste management and the environmental effects of radiation. We view the concepts of disposing or downgrading weapons-grade material, of converting reactors and gradually securing or eliminating Highly Enriched Uranium stockpiles, and of promoting a multilateral, cost-effective, politically-neutral fuel cycle to be all aspiring opportunities.
Mr President,
Greece fully supports the EU commitment for the implementation of the Resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference. In addition, within the Barcelona Process and the Union for the Mediterranean Paris Summit of July 2008, all Euro-Mediterranean partners have undertaken to pursue a mutually and effective Middle East Zone, free of weapons of mass destruction, nuclear, chemical and biological, and their delivery systems.
We hope that the Conference will bear the so much expected results. The previous Review Conference was suffocated in a strained political environment and that failure inevitably took its toll to the progress of disarmament and non proliferation. As we have already pointed out, there are reasons to be optimistic and there are many issues that we need to address. We look forward to productive and successful proceedings.
Thank you Mr. President.











 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 5



Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



