

Mr. President, 
Allow me to begin, like the other delegations that have participated in this General Debate, by congratulating you on your election as President of the 2000 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, congratulation I wish to extend to the other members of the General Committee. We are certain that thanks to your experience and your devotion to this theme, we shall reach progress in our efforts toward nuclear disarmament. 
Among the ideal legal norms formulated and commented on by Cicero in his Treatise on the Laws a fundamental principle stands out. This principle, having attained the status of a proverb, is known to all of us. It holds that the safety of the people should be the supreme law. "Ollis salus populi supreme lex esto." It was necessary to avoid, at all costs and above all, that in wars with other nations the Roman people should undergo tremendous massacres, subjugation or, worst of all, total extermination. 
But neither in the days of the illustrious orator nor at any time during the roughly twenty centuries that followed did it occur to anyone that the principle in question was susceptible of universal or global application. For, despite the dreadful catastrophe that the First World War inflicted on humanity, it was unthinkable that the action of the human being could endanger the safety of the human species in its absolute totality. 
This situation changed radically with the advent of the possibility, so horrendously and convincingly demonstrated in August 1945, that the application of nuclear science to warfare could result in holocausts that were theretofore unimaginable, by reason of their nature and effects as well as of their tremendous proportions. For, with the first use of the nuclear weapon humanity began to be haunted by the specter of the possibility of its complete or nearly complete annihilation as a result of an armed conflict. 
For this reason it became, unfortunately, necessary to transpose the Ciceronian principle to the global area. Thus, some two thousand years following its enunciation by Cicero, the authors of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons proclaimed, in the first paragraph of its preamble, the need to "take measures to safeguard the security of peoples." 
Guatemala, which is a party to that treaty since its entry into force, that is, since 1970, is not unaware that, as is the case with all human works, the instrument is not perfect. And, what is more, the non-proliferation treaty is characterized by a fundamental anomaly that was deliberately provided for by its authors, namely, the inequality that existed between the five States that possessed nuclear weapons prior to 1967, that is to say the five permanent members of the Security Council, and the other States parties, which were obligated under the treaty never to possess them. 
This defect does not, however, provide a fully valid ground for criticizing the treaty. For realism compels us to recognize that the inequality I have mentioned cannot be eliminated by a stroke of the pen. This the present-day reality and the one that, to a far larger extent, existed when the non-proliferation treaty was adopted, i.e. a time during which the cold war was going through one of its most acute periods. Moreover, and above all, the authors of the treaty realized that it constituted no more than an intermediate step towards a more satisfactory state of affairs, namely complete nuclear disarmament, which was foreseen in Article VI of the treaty. They also realized that, desirable as it was, that objective could be transcended, since in that article they referred to the need for negotiations aiming not only at nuclear disarmament but also at the adoption of "a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control," which would bring humanity, with respect to security, to a relatively golden age when the application of the Ciceronian maxim would be relegated to the environmental sphere. 
When welcoming, five years ago, the results of the last review conference, Guatemala hailed the accomplishment that was attained by overcoming the serious obstacles that stood in the way of an indefinite extension of the treaty. Thus, at this sixth Conference, which differs from all the others in being the first to be held in the second millennium, we can finally meet without harboring the least doubt as to the future existence of the treaty. 
We also welcome the consolidation and perfecting of the review conferences effected at the historic 1995 review conference. 
Although the road ahead is still a long one, we are also satisfied by the strides made since that conference, among which we have the following: 
The conclusions reached by the International Court of Justice in its 1996 advisory opinion on the legality of the threat of use or the use of nuclear weapons. 
The statements by the five nuclear powers contained in document NPT/C0NF.2000/PC.I/2, of 8 April 1997, as well as the intentions subsequently expressed by those States with respect to Article VI of the non-proliferation treaty and reproduced in paragraph 28 of background document NPT/CONF.2000/3. 
We are also pleased that nine States have become parties to the Treaty during the last five years, as well as the action by the Russian Duma on the START II Treaty and the CTBT, which constitutes a significant progress toward nuclear disarmament. 
The progress made on the issue of nuclear weapon free zones, especially in Central Asia and Mongolia, and express, once more, our complete support to the strengthening of the already existing free zones, noticing with satisfaction that them now cover the whole of the southern hemisphere. In this regard, we have examined with the greatest interest the information contained in background document NPT/CONF.2000/5. 
Mr. President, 
As subscriber Guatemala is concerned, however, over the negative attitude towards the Complete Test Ban Treaty maintained by a few States that also do not participate in the Non-Proliferation Treaty and whose participation in the CTBT is necessary for its entry into force. We urge those States to examine in depth, objectively and with an eye to the future, the advisability of becoming parties to both treaties. We also exhort any other State that has not yet carried out the formalities necessary for participating in the complete test ban treaty to consider the convenience of taking this action shortly. 
We are equally concerned that there are still some States that do not participate in the non-proliferation treaty and have destructive nuclear capability. To them and to all those that still remain outside the NPT, we would like to extend an invitation to join us in the fight toward nuclear disarmament. 
Finally, we call upon the States of South Asia and the Middle East to continue their efforts in order to offer their peoples, in the near future, the benefits of living in nuclear weapon free zones. 
  
