THE HOLY SEE
FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Vienna, April 30 - May 11,2012
Mr. Chairman,
1 I have the honour to deliver this Statement in the name of His
Excellency Archbishop Dominique Mamberti, Secretary for the Holy See's
Relations with States. The Delegation of the Holy See warmly congratulates
you, Ambassador Peter Woolcott, on your appointment as Chairman of this
Preparatory Committee. I assure you of the Holy See's support.
Above all, I have the honour of conveying to you, Mr. Chairman and to
all the distinguished participants in this First Preparatory Committee for the
201 5 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons the best wishes and cordial greetings of His Holiness Pope
Benedict XVI. Just over a year ago, on the occasion of the presentation of the
Letters of Credence of the new Ambassador of Japan to the Holy See, Pope
Benedict said: "The memory of the sombre episode [of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki] in the history of humanity becomes more poignant every year, while
those who witnessed this horror are disappearing. This tragedy ins is tently
reminds us of how necessary it is to persevere in the effort for the nonproliferation
of nuclear weapons and for disarmament. The nuclear weapon
remains a major source of concern. Possession of it and the risk of its possible
use give rise to tensions and distrust in many of the world's regions " (Address
of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI to H.E. Mr. Hidekazu Yamaguchi, New
Ambassador of Japan to the Holy See, Saturday 27 November 2010).
2. With this Preparatory Committee we embark on a journey whose
primary goal is to prepare fertile ground so that the IX Review Conference of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, scheduled for 201 5,
will produce consistent and encouraging results not only for strengthening the
Treaty itself, but also for making it a more effective instrument in responding to
the new challenges that are continually emerging on the nuclear horizon. While
the adoption of the Action Plan at the 2010 Review Conference was widely 
regarded as a success, its long-term impact will depend on the implementation
by the NPT member states. Nevertheless, its sometimes broad formulations,
lack of specific targets and deadlines on most of the action items, and possible
differences in interpretation pose significant challenges for review and
assessment, to which the Holy See would like to contribute with the following
reflections.
3. A first element for our reflection is the recognition of the strong
bonds that exist between nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation:
they are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and their transparent and
responsible implementation represents one of the principal instruments not only
in the fight against nuclear terrorism, but also in the concrete realization of a
culture of life and of peace capable of promoting in an effective way the integral
development of peoples. Despite steps for decades, we still have a profusion of
nuclear weapons. The Holy See believes there needs to be a binding together of
steps into a coherent commitment to eliminate nuclear weapons in clearly
defined phases for an incremental disarmament. Only the visible expression of
an intent to construct a global legal basis for the systematic elimination of all
nuclear weapons will suffice. It cannot be considered morally sufficient to draw
down the stocks of superfluous nuclear weapons while modernizing nuclear
arsenals and investing vast sums to ensure their future production and
maintenance. This current course will ensure the perpetuation of these weapons
indefinitely. For these reasons, the Holy See regards the Non-Proliferation
Treaty as the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, as the
basis to pursue nuclear disarmament and as an important element for
guaranteeing the inalienable rights of States Parties to develop research,
production and use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Since the NPT
is the only multilateral legal instrument currently available, intended to bring
about a nuclear weapons free world, it must never be allowed to be weakened.
Closely related to the NPT is the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the ratification of all States, in particular
nuclear-weapon States, of the respective Protocols to the Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zones Treaties. In this regard, the Holy See restates its strong support for the
efforts to establish such a zone in the Middle East. Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
(NWFZ) are the best example of trust, confidence and affirmation that peace
and security are possible without possessing nuclear weapons.
4. A second element for reflection, inevitably connected with the
preceding one, is the need to create within this forum a climate of confidence
and real cooperation. There is a growing awareness of how the interests of
national security are deeply connected with the interests of international
security. In acknowledging this interdependence, it thus becomes all the more 
evident how the NPT represents a fundamental pillar in nuclear nonproliferation,
hrnishing the legal basis not only for international verification on
nuclear material, under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, but also for the elimination of nuclear weapons.
In this context, the Holy See would like to reiterate its constant support in
the search for political solutions that not only make it possible to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, but also to prevent war from being seen as a
means to resolve conflicts between nations and between peoples. Furthermore,
the Holy See encourages all the nations to weave patiently the economic and
political bonds of peace that stand like a rampart against every claim of recourse
to arms and that make it possible to promote the integral human development of
all the peoples (cf. Address of Pope Benedict XVI at the General Audience, 5
May 201 0). A part of the sums allocated for weapons could be redeployed for
the development of economic, educational and health-care projects. This would
undoubtedly contribute to the inner stability of the country and to stability
among peoples (cf. Pope Benedict XVI, Encyclical Letter Caritas in veritate, n.
29). Now, in these times of the precarious situation of the market and of
employment, the need to find reliable funding for development remains a
constant concern.
5. A third point for reflection is the need to raise awareness within the
international community so that it might be more ambitious in making the NPT
an adequate instrument in the promotion of peace and international security. It
is becoming ever more clear that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons must be addressed from a comprehensive approach.
In order to accomplish this an innovative approach on determining the
legal, political and technical requirements to promote effectively the objectives
of the NPT is called for. In this direction, an analysis and determination of
practical steps is necessary so that these steps may more effectively respond to
questions concerning, for example, verification and transparency of the
activities of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, fissile material,
negative security assurances, the nuclear fuel cycle, control of radioactive
material, expansion of nuclear-weapons-free-zones, recognizing the value of the
CTBT, and improving the governance of the NPT.
Nevertheless, these alone can never be the only response to that which is,
above all, a matter pertaining to human nature. Threats to security come from
attitudes and actions hostile to human nature. It is, therefore, on the human level
that one must act - on the cultural and ethical level. If, in the short term,
technical and legal measures are necessary for the advancement of the nonproliferation
agenda, then, in the long-term, prevention measures are also called 
for, measures that penetrate to the deepest cultural and social roots. What is
absolutely necessary are programs of formation for the diffusion of a "culture of
non-proliferation" both in the nuclear sector and in the public conscience in
general. Security depends upon the State, but above all on the sense of
responsibility of each person. For fir too long, nuclear weapons have threatened
humanity and there has not been sufficient political will toward removing this
scourge. Now is the time for a profound rethinking and change in our perception
of nuclear weapons. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are essential
from a humanitarian, from a human point of view.
Mr. Chairman,
6. At the end of his journey, the epic Greek hero Odysseus arrives at
home but becomes involved in one more battle. However, in a crucial moment,
Athena cries out: "Hold back, you men of Ithaca, back from brutal war! Break
off - shed no more blood - make peace at once! Call a halt to the great leveler -
war." What did Odysseus do? 'He obeyed her, glad at heart. And Athena
handed down her pacts of peace between both sides for all the years to come"
(The Odyssey, Book XXIV, 584-585; 598-600).
We cannot sit back passively and expect peace simply to be handed down
to us. No, "eace is more than the absence of war: it cannot be reduced to the
maintenance of a balance of power between opposing forces nor does it arise
out of despotic dominion, but it is appropriately called the work of
justice .... Peace will never be achieved once and for all, but must be built up
continually" (Gaudium et Spes, No. 78). The foundations of peace are built
upon respect for human life and the primacy of the rule of law. The principal
aim of the rule of law is, in fact, to substitute "the material force of arms with
the moral force of law" (Benedict XV, Appeal to the Leaders of Peoples at War,
August 1, 19 17). These words might be able to enlighten the way that leads
from Vienna 20 12 to New York 201 5 and the IX Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman! 