t
Statement by H.E. Archbishop Ivan JurkoviE, Permanent Observer of the Holy See
to the United Nations and Other International Organizations in Geneva at the
Second Preparatory Committee of the 2020 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 23 Apri7 2018
Mr. Chair,
The Holy See Delegation congratulates you on your appointment as president of the Second
Preparatory Committee of the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Confronted with the current sihiation of increasing international tensions and instability, the
Holy See wishes to reiterate the firm conviction that "international relations cannot be held captive
to military force, mutual intimidation, and the parading of stockpiles of arms."l As we move
towards the 2020 Review Conference, the Delegation of the Holy See appeals to the shared wisdom
and good will of humanity to reaffirm disarmament and non-proliferation as an essential part of our
agenda.
Weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, create a false sense of security.
The tragic illusion of a "peace" based on fear is superficial at best. People aspire to true peace, which
is the opposite of fear. This desire "is one of the deepest longings of the human heart. It is rooted in
the Creator who makes all people members of the one human family. This desire can never be
satisfied by military means alone, much less the possession of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction."2
Mr. Chair,
Non-proliferation and disarmament are not only ethical responsibilities but moral and legal
obligations towards each member of the human family. They arez in a sense, two sides of the same
coin, mutually reinforcing and complementary.
However, the continued existence of nuclear weapons, their modernization and
development of ever more powerful ones, disseminates discord with their proliferation. Nuclear
weapons contribute to foster a mentality of fear, violence and dominance, that has an impact on the
entire human family. It is an infortlll"late irony that we have a full adherence in the rightful
condemnation of other weapons of mass destruction, whileL on the other sidez We find complacency
over the continued possession and massive modernizations of nuclear weapons.
I PopeFrancis,Addressto participar+tsin the Intemational Symposium"Prospectsfor azoorldfreeofnuclearweaponsayidfor
integra( disarmameyit", 10 November 2017.
i Pope Francis, Message to the President of the Conference oi'i the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, Vienna, 7
December 2014.
Pope Francis repeatedly reminds us that there is a deep coru"iection between all things and
everyone. It is deceptive to think that the security and peace of some is indivisible from the collective
security and peace of others. In a united family of nations, increasingly interdependent, national
security interests are inevitably connected to those related to intemational security. Short-sighted
approaches to national security and double standards have undermined unity and progress,
damaging the original trajectory, letter and spirit of the NPT.
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are linked to integral disarmament and this is
linked to integral human development, which Pope Paul VI defined as "another name for peace"
Poverty reduction strategies cannot be pursued apart from disarmament aitd peace efforts. The arms
race, the modemization and development of nuclear arsenals, irfrastruchires and delivery systems,
deny the poor and disadvantaged of the resources needed to reduce poverty and to foster integral
huinaii development.
Imagine if all the resources that have been squandered and that are being poured into the
modemizat-ion and maintenance of nuclear weapons could be invested in addressing poverb,7,
inequality, injustice, education, liealth aiid environmental degradation!
In November, last year, the Holy See convened an intemational Symposium on a world free
from nuclear weapons to explore and strengthen these connections between integral disarmament
and integral hiunan development. In addressing the participants, Pope Francis expressed concern
over the catastrophic hiunanitarian consequences and environmental impact of the use of nuclear
weaponsL as well as the risk of accidental detonation as a result of error of aiiy kind, not only
condemning the threat of their use but their very possession as well.a
Mr. Chair,
When the Holy See acceded to the NPT in 1971, it appreciated and fully shared the
considerations expressed in the Preamble on the awareness of the "the devastation that would be
visited upon an mankind by a nuclear war and the consequent need to make every effort to avert
the danger of such a war and to take measures to safeguard the security of peoples."' Sadly, these
considerations ring ever more urgent today.
In "the belief thatjustice, right reason, and the recognition of man's dignity cry outinsistently
for a cessation to the arms race;"' the Holy See ratified the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons concluded last year under the auspices of the United Nations. This Treaf5r,based on the
preoccupations for the catastrophic hiunanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons as well as their
threat to humanity and all Ufe on earth, showed how lively the desire for true peace really is. The
Delegation of the Holy See wishes to remind that both this Treaty and the NPT are inspired and
driven by the very same moral imperatives and objectives. In this regard, they mutually reinforce
and complement each other.
Mr. Chair,
3 Cf. Pope Francis, Address to participants in the International Symposium "Prospects for a world free of nuclear zoeaponsand
for integra( disarmament", 10 November 2017.
4 Holy See's declaration ripon accession to the NPT, 25 February 1971.
5Pope Francis, Address to the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 Janriary 2018.
2
The illusion of safety in nuclear strength is contradicted by the dangerous and haunting
realities of nuclear threats and proliferation. This WaSz after all, the original letter and spirit of the
NPT. To achieve the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons through irreversible, verifiable and
universal nuclear disarmament, we must free the human heart from fear and seething animosities.
Nuclear weapons should find no place inn military arsenals, but above all, their use should find no
place in our hearts and minds.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
3
