Check against delivery!
STATEMENT OF HUNGARY
by
Ambassador Dr. György i’ioInár
Special Representative of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
for Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
at the First Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
United Nations
Vienna, 2 May 2017
Mr. Chairman,
Let me join previous speakers in warmly congratulating you on your election as Chairman of
the first Preparatory Committee and assure you of our full support. We also commend you fur
the thorough and comprehensive preparatory work aimed at achieving a successful outcome
of the PrepCom. Hungary fully associates itself with the statement of the EU and that of
Australia delivered on behalf of the Vienna Group of 10. Therefore. I would like to make only
a few remarks from our national perspective.
Mr. Chairman.
Although at the last Review Conference held in 2015 there was no consensus on a final
document. the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) is and remains the cornerstone of the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime, multilateral nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. Consequently. we need to recommit ourselves to the fulfilment of the
objectives of the Treaty and the comprehensive Action Plan for follow-on actions across the
three pillars as set out in the Final Document adopted by the 2010 Review Conference. Since
the three pillars are equally essential. interdependent and mutually reinforcing, Hungary
attaches equal importance to each of them and strives towards their balanced implementation.
As far as multilateral nuclear disarmament is concerned, we are convinced that Article VI of
the NPT provides the fundamental framework to achieve the ultimate goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons. In our view, this goal can only be achieved through a gradual and inclusive
process by taking concrete practical steps fully engaging nuclear weapon states and promoting
international security and stability. Such practical steps that should be taken together by
nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states include the entry into force of the CTBT, a ban on the
production of tissue material for nuclear weapons, as well as. making progress on nuclear
disarmament verification and transparency measures.
On the other hand, it is our strong view that without taking into account the global security
context. and the role nuclear deterrence still plays in this respect. and without the involvement
of nuclear weapon states, simply negotiating and concluding a new treaty aimed at banning
nuclear weapons will not eliminate a single nuclear warhead. Conversely intentionally or
unintentionally it may lead to the erosion of the NPT regime. In sum. there is no fast track in
this area, only an incremental and progressive approach can produce tangible results.
Turning to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Hungary is of the view that it represents one
of the gravest threats to regional and international peace and security. It is suffice to mention
in this context the DPRK’s nuclear weapons’ program. which constitutes a serious challenge
to nuclear non-proliferation. Therefore horizontal and vertical proliferation risks must be
addressed in an effective way to preserve the credibility of the NPT. The role of the IAEA’s
comprehensive safeguards system is crucial in this field.
Hungary welcomes all relevant steps that lead to solving non-proliferation issues of common
concern. One of those tasks is to prevent the abuse of Article X of the Treaty. which can
undermine the integrity of the NPT. Consequently. we support the idea of working out
principles for exercising the right of withdrawal.
With regards to regional issues Hungary is in favor of the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. We support
efforts to create the conditions for launching this process at a conference to be attended by all
states of the region on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by them.
Concerning the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action between the E3/EU+3 and Iran, we are
of the view that it is in full conformity with the principles of the NPT and thus creates a
positive example for resolving controversial questions within the broader framework of the
Treaty. So far, we are pleased with the fulfilment of obligations by all sides, which remains
crucial throughout the implementation of the JCPOA.
Mr. Chairman,
As a country with an active peaceful nuclear program with plans for further expansion of its
capacities, Hungary recognizes that all States parties have an inalienable right for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in conformity with the provisions of the NPT. At the same time,
Hungary has a keen interest in ensuring that all actors maintain and work towards the highest
possible standards in all aspects of nuclear safety and security that are enablers for peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. We support the work of the JAEA, which has a central role in this
field, We also take part in a number of initiatives and fora that play a supplementary but
important role.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, let me reiterate our unconditional support for the NPT and our commitment to
its full and balanced implementation. We call on all States parties to take a proactive and
flexible approach in order to ensure the successful outcome of the current review cycle
culminating in the Review conference to be held in 2020, when we will mark the 50th
anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT. This first PrepCom should give a strong and
positive impetus to the process.
—3 —
