0
Please check against delivery
Statement by
Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia
at the General Debate of the Second Session of The
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Geneva, 23 April – 4 May 2018
1
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We believe
that under your leadership, this meeting would be able to lay the necessary ground
towards a successful NPT Review Conference in 2020.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made by the Delegation of Venezuela
on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.
We commend your initiative, Mr. Chairman, in organizing a series of regional
dialogue and consultations on NPT. As the host of the Asia-Pacific Regional
Dialogue and Consultations, Indonesia continues to see the benefit of this process
and believes that this mechanism of exchange of views should be continued.
Mr. Chairman,
We would like to re-emphasize that the objectives of the NPT can only be achieved
through a balanced, comprehensive and non-discriminatory implementation of its
three pillars.
It is regrettable that implementation of all the three pillars remains imbalanced.
There is lack of progress towards disarmament. Nuclear weapons states continue to
rely on nuclear weapons in their military doctrine. In a complex contemporary
international security environment, Indonesia is of the view that the nuclear
deterrence doctrine should be abandoned and considered obsolete, as a relic of the
Cold War.
The persistent adherence to the doctrine has also made progress on nonproliferation
pillar stagnant.
With regard to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, full, effective and nondiscriminatory
implementation of Article IV should be guaranteed. Preferential
treatment should be given to the non-nuclear-weapons States Parties to the Treaty
when it comes to all activities in the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Regrettably, we have lost an important momentum at the 2015 NPT Review
Conference. This has impeded the efforts to assess the progress and achievements
in the implementation of the 2010 Action Plan, which also prevent the improvement of
transparency and confidence-building.
The claim that thousands of nuclear weapons have been retired and dismantled by
the two largest possessors of nuclear weapons, through their bilateral strategic
agreement, is yet to be verified transparently.
2
In this regard, Indonesia supports the role of IAEA in discharging its safeguards and
verification mandates and encourages Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Weapons States to
continue cooperation with IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
An important development on global efforts towards total elimination of nuclear
weapons is the conclusion of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
Indonesia supported and played an active role in its negotiations. Indonesia believes
that the TPNW is complementary and mutually reinforcing to the NPT and addresses
the deep concern on the catastrophic humanitarian impacts of any use of nuclear
weapons, as well as being an effective legal measure under Article VI of the NPT.
Indonesia consistently calls for the earliest possible entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and stresses the immense
importance of the Treaty’s universalization. Indonesia tirelessly urges all States that
have not yet signed or ratified the Treaty - particularly those listed in the Annex 2 – to
do so without further delay.
Indonesia would like to once again recognize that the establishment of Nuclear
Weapon Free Zones represent positive steps toward attaining the objectives of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Indonesia also encourages continued
cooperation among Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, towards supporting the
achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons.
In this regard, we call upon all concerned parties to double the efforts to convene the
long-awaited Conference on the Middle East’s Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction. A nuclear weapons free zone of the Middle East
will go a long way in helping enable regional and international causes for peace and
security.
To conclude, Mr. Chairman, this Preparatory Committee Meeting is indeed an
important phase in preparing the 2020 Review Conference, which cannot afford to
have another failure to reach agreement on substantive documents.
Indonesia is prepared to work collectively with all States Parties and civil society
organizations, in pursuing the balanced and non-discriminatory implementation of the
three pillars of NPT, as well as a universal NPT.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.