Mr. President,
Indonesia's commitment to the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - the three pillars of the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty - is total and absolute.
The Non-proliferation Treaty constitutes nothing less than the cornerstone of the global regime for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
Indonesia, therefore, participates in the present Review Conference imbued, and indeed, driven, with a renewed and strong determination to ensure its unqualified success.
Mr. President,
For many years now, the world's nuclear disarmament agenda has showed scant progress.
The Conference on Disarmament has remained locked in stalemate;
The Nuclear Weapon States have yet to keep their part of the grand bargain that was the basis for the indefinite extension of the Non-proliferation Treaty in 1995;
A good number of non-nuclear weapon states have yet to fully lived up to their commitments under the NPT.
In short, as the world grapples with new menace and challenges, the threat of a nuclear holocaust very much remains.
Mr. President,
We cannot afford more of the same.
Of intransigence all around and of missed opportunities.
Rather, we must think anew.
Building bridges where differences hitherto prevailed.
Accentuating the possibilities for common undertaking, rather than succumbing to the misplaced comfort of positions past.
Mr, President,
After so many years during which the cause of nuclear disarmament lay inert, today, as we hold this NPT Review Conference, there are some positive signs.
Countries appear awakened to the urgency for nuclear disarmament.
The first steps in the right direction have been taken.
The United States and the Russian Federation have signed a new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START).
We are also cognizant of some positive aspects of the United States' Nuclear Posture Review.
We welcome these developments and what we expect will be the further marginalization of nuclear weapons.
Every step forward, no matter how small, should give us new momentum toward the next step so that we advance inexorably to our final goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
Let us make optimal use of this nascent positive signs.
Let us seek a process of positive engagement with all partners and discover how we can move forward.
Creating a climate conducive for the success of our present NPT review Conference.
Indonesia, Mr. President, wish very much to contribute to such positive milieu.
Hence, I wish to inform the present august assembly that Indonesia is initiating the process of the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. It is our fervent hope that this further demonstration of our commitment to the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation agenda will encourage other countries that have not ratified the Treaty, to do the same.
Mr. President,
As we begin this 2010 NPT Review Conference, allow me to share some key thoughts.
First, all nuclear-weapon states must demonstrate, in deeds, not mere words, their commitment to nuclear disarmament.
The nuclear weapon states must fully carry out their commitments under the NPT and eventually eliminate their nuclear arsenals. Pending to the total elimination of nuclear weapons, it is incumbent that nuclear weapon states provide negative security assurances to the non-nuclear weapon states.
Only then would their often expressed concern about the threat of nuclear proliferation carry greater resonance.
Second, nuclear proliferation threats, wherever their source, must be effectively addressed without discrimination and double standard; on the basis of multilateralism and international law.
Thus, for instance, we must prevail on the state of Israel to come into the NPT fold. We must support the establishment new nuclear weapon-free zones, especially in the Middle East, as agreed in the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference.
We must support existing nuclear weapon-free zones, such as the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone Treaty.
We certainly find it difficult to rationalize nuclear energy cooperation involving those who have openly chosen to add to the proliferation momentum.
Third, the inalienable rights of all NPT parties to carry out research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, as provided in Article IV of the Treaty, must be respected.
In this regard, the IAEA must be strengthened to be able to fulfill its mandate. All states are duty bound to cooperate closely with the Agency.
And fourth, we must work intensively together to produce a universal nuclear weapons convention with a specific timeline for the attainment of complete nuclear disarmament.
For the eradication of all nuclear weapons is our only assurance that they will never be used.
Mr. President,
We firmly hold that it is crucial to keep a balanced, comprehensive and nondiscriminatory approach to the three pillars of the NPT—nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In our view, it is self-evident that these three pillars are mutually reinforcing.
It is, therefore, of the greatest urgency that all states adhere to the NPT. All states parties must strive to make it universal; otherwise it cannot be fully effective.
We call upon all states not yet party to the NPT to accede to it at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. President,
The vision of a world of zero nuclear weapons is not a new vision. Indonesia has always deemed this a valid and absolutely necessary goal. We must all share and support this vision and strive together to attain it—through a sustained and constructive engagement among the non-nuclear weapon states and the nuclear weapon states.
We must all play our respective roles.
Nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states have their own obligations and responsibilities; all must find the political will to fulfill them.
Let us all learn from the shortcomings of the past, rise above our differences, and work together to build on the recent positive signs.
In that way we can build a much safer world for our generation and those who will come after us.
I thank you very much, Mr. President,









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 6

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 5

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



