Please check against delivery
Statement by Mr. Fikry Cassidy
Alternate Head of Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia to
The First Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
General Debate
Vienna, 2 May 2012
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me to join the other distinguished delegations in
congratulating you on your appointment as chair of this Preparatory
Committee. Indonesia is confident that under your able stewardship, the
Preparatory Committee will progressively inch its way towards a
successful Review Conference in 2015.
I would also like to express my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Libran Cabactulan, the President of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference, for his opening remarks and for his leadership, which led us
into a successful NPT Review Conference in 2010.
The Indonesian Delegation wishes to associate itself with the
statement delivered by Egypt on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned States
Parties to the NPT.
Indonesia also associates itself with the statement made by
Switzerland with regard to further exploring the humanitarian dimension
of nuclear disarmament, for it brings again to the forefront the very reason
why this Treaty was established forty years ago. 
Mr. Chairman,
As the starting point of the 2015 Review Conference, the 1st Preparatory
Committee bears high significance. Building on the consensual outcome of
the 2010 NPT Review Conference, this PrepCom needs to exert its due role
in enhancing the momentum for enabling advancement on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.
Indonesia hopes that all three preparatory conferences will be successful in
realizing tangible progress in all of the NPTfs three pillars: nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and the inalienable right to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a balanced, mutually reinforcing and
non-discriminatory manner.
The NPT is a stepping stone towards a world without nuclear weapons.
Such a world of peace and security is in the interest of Indonesia, the
international community and mankind at large.
The mere reduction of nuclear armaments does not provide much comfort
to the world, for the existence of even one nuclear weapon carries with it
the untenable risk that it may be used one day by design or accident,
ending with devastating consequences.
The international community should not only continue to echo the fear of
nuclear weapons. We must also show -through our actions- that we are
absolutely serious in our pursuit to realize the vision of a nuclear weapon
free world.
The indefinite extension of the NPT does not imply an indefinite
possession of nuclear weapons by the NWSs. Nor does it imply an
indefinite preservation of the status of non-members to remain outside the
Treaty, which defeats its universality. 
No country should possess nuclear weapons.
For countries like Indonesia that have willfully rescinded the nuclear
weapons path, it is all the more important that they be given unambiguous,
legally binding and universal security assurances by the NWSs.
It is regrettable that despite committing to pursuing negative security
assurances (NSA) towards non-nuclear weapon states (NNWSs), the NWSs
have not yet supported concrete advancement on a universal, explicitly
clear, and legally binding instrument on NSA.
No have we witnessed any tangible progress on the subjects of negotiating
a Nuclear Weapons Convention, Prevention of Arms in Outer Space, and a
fissile material treaty in accordance with the Shannon mandate.
We believe that Nuclear Weapon Free Zones are an essential regional effort
in our pursuit of creating a nuclear weapon free world. Our commitment
to strengthening and expanding NWFZs has never wavered. In this regard,
we wish to underline the resumption of the direct consultations between
NWS and Parties to the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone during
the Indonesian Chairmanship of ASEAN last year, which resulted in an
understanding on the accession of the NWSs to the Protocol of the
SEANWFZ. This development will allow early accession of the NWS to the
Protocol of the Bangkok Treaty, which we hope will be finished as soon as
possible. We would like to extend our appreciation to the NWS for the
constructive engagement they showed during the consultation.
We commend the organization of the first preparatory meeting for the 3rd
Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that establish
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZs) and Mongolia on 27 April 2012. We
believe that it will provide a robust foundation for the success of the 3rd
Conference in 2015, in which Indonesia has agreed to serve as President. 
Indonesia views the new START between the United States and the
Russian Federation as a positive measure. Nevertheless, such measures,
however well-intentioned, are unable to answer the international call for
the NWSs to undertake complete nuclear disarmament.
We reiterate again the significance of the implementation of the 13 Practical
Steps to actualize Article VI, and that actions on disarmament should be
transparent, irreversible and internationally verifiable.
The international community would not be doing its duty if it did not also
focus effectively on the Middle East.
Indonesia underscores the urgency of establishing a Middle East zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction. In this
regard, we fully support the convening of the Conference, as mandated in
the 2010 Action Plan. A nuclear weapons free Middle East will go a long
way in helping to enable regional and international peace and security.
Mr. Chairman,
We welcome the successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
We recall the determination of all States Parties during the Conference to
elevate themselves politically to reach an agreement on substantive issues,
which resulted in a robust Final Document that represents a critical and
consensual opening for galvanizing international actions to achieve the
objectives of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the advancement
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The pronouncements on achieving a nuclear weapon free world made by
the leaders, diplomats and members of the civil society during the
Conference then were welcomed by everyone near and far. It was rightly
expected that in the years to come, the fatal policies on nuclear deterrence 
would be done away with, and that an early attainment of a world free
from nuclear weapons would finally be a reality.
Most of the States Parties remain concerned about the slow pace at which
the 2010 Final Document is being implemented. We believe that the success
of the 2010 Review Conference will also be determined by the extent to
which the commitment resulting from it is implemented. We must all work
harder to help enable the needed political action in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
On its part, and as a continuation of the Indonesian role, Indonesia recently
ratified the CTBT. We call upon the remaining Annex I1 countries,
especially the remaining nuclear weapon states and other states claiming
possession of nuclear weapons to follow suit, for it is they, above all, who
must first and foremost commit to the CTBT. We continue to view the
CTBT as a crucial tool in our efforts to further pursue the cause of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.
We urge greater attention by the State Parties to the fulfillment of
obligations under Article VI, and also urge them to produce further
practical actions under their agreed commitments.
Indonesia is concerned by the lack of political will on a wide range of
issues that have been stalling the work in the CD and other parts of the UN
disarmament machinery.
All national and international stakeholders must play their part in helping
to bring about the needed political capital, particularly within the NWS, so
as to enable State Parties to move decisively on undertaking their agreed
cornrnitments under the NPT. 
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia =mains of the view that the inalienable right of the States Parties
to develop and use nuclear energy and technologies for peaceful purposes
should be guaranteed and should by no means be restricted, and therefore,
that the observance of Article IV of the NPT is absolutely vital.
Indonesia commits to continue to exercise these inalienable rights for the
maximum benefit of our people and nation. However, we are also
committed to exercising these rights in a manner that adequately addresses
the nonproliferation risk, including through the application of NPT
safeguards. In the same vein, we continue to believe that a strengthened
safeguards system, including through the application of the Additional
Protocol, will remain an essential element of our collective effort to address
the nonproliferation risk of all peaceful nuclear activities.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that Indonesia is fully committed to working with
all State Parties to help achieve solid and positive outcomes in this critical
new review cycle. The goal of a world free of nuclear weapons is in our
sights. Let us move together with reinvigorated determination to win this
goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman 