Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Statement
by
H.E. Ambassador A.A. Soltanieh
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations
and Other International Organizations in Vienna at
the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee of the 2015 NPT Review
Conference
Geneva, 23 April 2013
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset and on behalf of the delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran, allow
me add my voice to those delegations that have congratulated you on your election to
preside over the second meeting of the Preparatory Committee to lay the groundwork
for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference. I assure you of
my Delegation's suppost of your endeavors as well as our contribution to ensure the
success of this Committee meeting and, through our work, bring this session to a
successful outcome.
I would also like to associate my delegation with the positions stated by the NonAligned
Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
We are gathered here to review the status of the implementation of the 2010 NPT
Action Plan as well as other commitments that the states parties to the NPT are
obliged to fblfill in achieving a world free from nuclear weapons, in particular the
unequivocal undertaking by Nuclear Weapons States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals.
Call for real progress on nuclear disarmament and convening the 2012 Middle East
Conference are the most important obligations amongst the actions that the 2010 
Review Conference decided upon them by consensus. However, the situations of both
of these goals are disappointing. The Islamic Republic of Iran has constantly echoed
its concern on the discriminatory and double standard approaches by a few
unaccountable States Parties in implementing the provisions of the Treaty. Despite of
the agreements in 2010, the trend in nuclear disarmament is worrisome and
disappointing. Let us examine few facts in this regard:
- The continued existence of tens of thousands of nuclear warheads in the
stockpile of the nuclear-weapon States, most of them on high-trigger alert and their
day by day modernization, constitute the most serious threat to the survival of
mankind. We, non-nuclear weapon states, do not feel secure living under the blade of
using or threat of using of nuclear weapons. Maintaining nuclear weapons stockpiles
and strategically rely on them shall not guide the possessors to the resolve that is
required for moving toward removing either the risk of their use or their vertical or
horizontal proliferation. Having said that, how international community can bear a
justification for the possession of nuclear weapons by a small group of States. The
most important outcome of the 2010 Conference was reaffirmation of the
unequivocal undertaking made by the nuclear-weapon States at the 2000 Review
Conference to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenal. However,
reaffirmation of commitments in the context of nuclear disarmament does not suffice
realization of the goal of nuclear disarmament. Regrettably, declared policies of
certain Nuclear Weapon States on nuclear disarmament fall short of practical and
measurable steps.
- The Non-Nuclear Weapon States parties to the NPT remains deeply concerned
by existing strategic defense doctrines of the nuclear-weapon States that set out the
rationales for the use of nuclear weapons. The US Nuclear Posture Review as well as
the NATO Strategic Concept which results in broadening justifications for the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons in contravention of NPT obligations of the nuclear
weapon states and worrying cases of breaching norms of international law.
- We should add the ongoing plan to deploy a global missile defense system that
gravelly threatens the nuclear disarmament goal to worrying cases. Such a plan will
not increase the security of its sponsor and host countries. It will only prompt
countermeasures by the other nuclear-weapon States that are the main target of such a
system to build up and rely more on their nuclear forces, thus, brining about a new
chain of nuclear arms race. Missile defense system is in clear breach of the Action I
of the Action Plan on nuclear disarmament agreed upon in the 2010 Review
Conference. Ironically by Action- I all the States parties committed themselves to
pursue policies that are fully compatible with the objective of achieving a world
without nuclear weapons. Regrettably, there is no indication showing that the nuclear
weapon states parties are moving in that direction.
- Furthermore, in flagrant violation of its international obligation, On December
5, 2012 U.S. has conducted its 27th sub critical nuclear experiment involving a scale
model nuclear warhead primary, a first-of-its-kind sub critical test since signing the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). Such nuclear experiment that's supportive
for advancing nuclear weapons designs and, worse, conducted in an underground area
of a nuclear test site which the other Nuclear Weapon States would follow suit, is a
2 
recipe for global destabilization. Such sub-critical tests and computer simulations to
design new weapons, a case of non-compliance by the United Sates with its
international obligations under the NPT could be a resumption of the nuclear arms
race and a revival risk of global disaster.
- According to the public sources, nuclear weapons spending have sharply
increased from the 2010 till now and it is "conservatively estimated, that will reach at
least one trillion dollars on nuclear weapons and their direct support systems over the
next decade". Most of it allocated to decisions to upgrade and replace aging nuclear
production factories, missiles, submarine s, and bombers. The United States itself will
spend untold billions of dollars to operate its nuclear armada during its 50-year
planned lifespan (2030 until 2080!). This figure is not included the secret spending of
nuclear aspirants such as plutonium re-processing and uranium enrichment facilities
or the missiles, planes, and submarines that nuclear aspirants are procuring with a
secret dual -use purpose of someday accommodating a nuclear payload.
- In addition to the above, nuclear sharing among the nuclear-weapon States or
with non-nuclear weapon States whether under military alliances or any other
framework continues to be another source of concern and proliferation in all its
aspects. Deployed nuclear weapons in Europe, specifically in non-nuclear weapon
state parties, is a matter of serous security concern and is tantamount to the flagrant
violation of the NPT undertakings. Iran has requested the Director General of the
IAEA to report to all Member States whether these countries have informed the
amount, locations and specification of weapon grade nuclear material, high enriched
uranium and plutonium or not. If yes the United States has violated Article -I of the
treaty and those European non-weapon states have violated Article -11 of the Treaty.
If the European non-weapon states have not repoted to the Agency then they have
non-compliance with their IAEA's Safeguards obligation, including Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement as well the Additional Protocol. Needless to say that the
distribution of nuclear weapons in Europe has increased nuclear security risk due to
the increase of potential access ofterrorist. The recent agreement between France and
UK is a also another clear example of disregard to nuclear disarmament. The Trident
nuclear submarine project of UK and its decision to upgrade with anticipated 100
billions of pounds is clear breach of Article VI of NPT and the commitments during
the NPT Review Conference in 2010. Germany sold a number of Dolphin
submarines to a non-party to the NPT, i.e. the Israeli regime. Since these submarines
are capable of being equipped with nuclear cruise missiles thus it is an unconcealed
case of proliferation and non-compliance. One could not neglect the fact that such
measures are in contrary to resolution of NPT in 1995 for establishment nuclear
weapon free zone in the Middle East and put all attempt in serious jeopardy.
Mr. Chairman,
International community cannot wait till the horrors of the nuclear weapons
happens and must set a deadline and a target date for the total elimination of nuclear
arsenals. Such a cutoff date could enable the Conference on Disarmament to
commence negotiations on Nuclear Weapons Convention and concluding it as soon
as possible as the highest priority. The NAM States parties to the NPT did propose, in
2010 Review Conference, 2025 as a target date for the total elimination of nuclear
3 
weapons. This way forward shall render effective and systematic progress towards
implementing nuclear disarmament obligations under article VI of the NPT and
would fill the gap between sincerity and hypocrisy of certain Nuclear Weapon States.
Recalling that under action (5) of the 2010 Review Conference "action plan on
nuclear disarmament", the nuclear-weapon States committed to accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament, Iran as non-nuclear weapon
state is seriously concerned that no substantive progress report about their
undertakings under action (5) of the aforesaid action plan was submitted after 3 years.
Patience of international community is limited. They got to submit factual
comprehensive progress report to the Preparatory Committee in 2014, facilitating
consideration of next steps for the full implementation of Article VI of the Treaty in
realization of the objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons; otherwise the
2015 Review Conference shall turn into a challenging decision- making forum for the
future NPT. Any factual reporting mechanism shall systematically reflect, inter alia,
principles and measures of transparency, irreversibility, verifiability, ban on use, time
frame, budget reduction on nuclear weapon, qualitative and quantitative disarmament
measures, and nuclear doctrines. Such reports would disclose hypocrisy of certain
Nuclear Weapon States that apparently are supportive of "a nuclear free world".
Mr. Chairman,
It is unacceptable, illegitimate, injustice and in contravention of the terms of
the NPT that a large number of States have been subject to discriminatory restrictive
control regimes by some developed States Parties. Article IV of the NPT is crystal
clear that "'nothing shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all parties
to the NPT to develop and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance
with Article I and 11 of the NPT." Hence my country along with the other non- nuclear
weapon states of the NPT is demanding actual respect for exercise of their right to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Imposition of restrictions as a cover for
implementation of the foreign policy objectives of certain States is a clear violation of
Article IV obligations, and challenges both the integrity and credibility of the Treaty.
Consistent with Action 51 of the 2010 NPT Action Plan, undue restrictions on the
transfer of nuclear materials, equipment and technologies for the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy should be swiftly removed. Unfortunately no practical step has been
taken to this end. The Islamic Republic of Iran, for its part, is determined to pursue all
legal areas of nuclear technology, including fuel cycle and enrichment technology,
exclusively for peaceful purposes, a legal activity that has been and will continue to
be carried out under the IAEA supervision. In this connection, the outcome
documents of the 2000 and 2010 NPT Review Conferences have reiterated that each
country's choices and decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy should
be respected without jeopardizing its policies or international cooperation agreements
and arrangements for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and its fuel-cycle policies
including enrichment..
I am obliged to put on record the appreciation of the people and Government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran for the continuous indispensible support of the NAM
during last decade, based on the principle of movement. 
In this context I have to draw the kind attention of all to the fact that during
the last 10 years, following the most robust inspections unprecedented in the history
of the IAEA, over 7000 man-day routine and over 100 snap shut inspection with 2
hours notice, the former and the present director general have declared no evidence of !
diversion of nuclear material to military purpose is found and the Agency is able to I
I continue its verification activities, without ant obstacles, thus all nuclear material and
activities including enrichment remain peaceful. It is a matter of disappointment and
is even shameful that the EU and the United States did .
~ut. in their statements, Iran ,
and a Non-party to the Treaty having Nuclear weapons, on an equal footing. Such
approaches have serious consequences for the universality of the NPT as well as
other Treaties, such as the CTBT since it destroys any incentive to join. Iran is paying
heavy price for its membership and full commitment to the NPT while others outside
the Treaty are exempted from any inspection and sanctions, but receiving full nuclear
cooperation of western countries specifically US and Canada.
Mr. Chairman,
The Islamic republic of Iran has spared no efforts with a view to establish a nuclear
free zone in the Middle East since 1974 that my country initially proposed it to the
United Nations. In this line, while underlining the reaffirmation by the 2010 NPT
Review Conference that "the resolution remains valid until its goals and objectives
are achieved", we reemphasize that immediate, full, and unconditional
implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East as an essential element on
the basis of which the Treaty was indefinitely extended in the 1995 is of vital
importance to the credibility of the NPT.
Given the records of the Zionist regime of Israel in aggression and occupation,
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons is extremely important
in putting an end to the gravest threat of the nuclear weapons of the said Regime to
the stability and security of the NPT States parties in the region and the world. The
threat posed by possession of nuclear weapons by Israeli regime and its refusal to
submit itself to the NPT and placing its nuclear facilities under the IAEA safeguards
has prompted a number of States in the region not to accede to international
instruments dealing with weapons of mass destruction, most notably CWC and BWC.
With respect to the implementation of measures related to the 1995 Resolution on the
Middle East, contained in the follow-on actions of the 2010 NPT Review Conference,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, declared in advance its readiness for active participation
in the scheduled 2012 Conference on the Middle East and stressed that an agreed plan
of action and timetable for universality of the NPT in the Middle East should be the
only top priority at the said Conference. However, all parties to the Treaty witnessed
again that the opposition of the United States in support of the Zionist regime
impeded convening of the 2012 Conference after decades. The unilateral decision by
United States on postponement is disregard of unanimous decision of the 2010
Review Conference, planning and intensive consultation by the facilitator,
undermining the determination and cooperation of Iran and Arab state parties, and the
last but not the least, a serious setback to NPT. It is a clear indication that the United
States pays no heed to the repeated calls by the international community to place 
clandestine nuclear weapon activities of the Zionist regime of Israel under the nonproliferation
regime of the Treaty. The United States is isolating herself by
supporting Israeli regime at any price.
Mr. Chairman,
The Islamic republic of Iran as a victim of weapons of mass destruction over the
recent decades firmly believe that the international community must find a speedy
way towards total elimination of the common threat of deliberate or accidental
nuclear detonation. The nature of the nuclear weapons and its immediate catastrophic
impacts on the human beings must oblige us to collectively work for the sake of
humankind's survival and the upcoming 2015 NPT Review Conference can create a
momentum that results in a process for absolute illegality and illegitimacy of all
nuclear weapons as well as their prompt elimination.
Iran has constantly and categorically rejected nuclear weapons and they have
no place in its defense doctrine. Iran's exclusively peaceful nuclear activities are
perused in accordance with the rights and obligations enshrined in the NPT. As a
demonstration of the fact, Ayatollah Khamenei, the Supreme Leader of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has reiterated his Fatwa on the prohibition of nuclear weapons.
During the NAM Summit in Tehran in 2012, His Eminent declared: "The Islamic
Republic of Iran regards the use of nuclear weapons as a cardinal and
unforgivable sin." This religious decree is rooted, amongst others, in the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons and founded on the high values of our belief
in preserving human safety, security and dignity. The nuclear policy and global
vision of the Islamic Republic of Iran is summarized as: Nuclear energy for all,
nuclear weapons for none.
Mr. Chairman, distinguished delegates,
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government, I declare that Islamic Republic of
Iran shall never compromise on its inalienable right for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, including the undeniable right for enrichment, and at the same time it shall
continue its cooperation with the IAEA in accordance with NPT obligation namely
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement(INFCIRC/214).
Hostile policies of western countries, including dual track, carrot and stick,
sanction and talk's policies are doomed to failure. Sanctions, assassination of the
nuclear scientists, the ugly phenomena of this century, threat of attack by Zionist
regime of Israel supported by its western allies, have and will strengthen the
determination of Great Nation of Iran to pursue its right path.
Finally, western countries are advised to change the gear from confrontation to
cooperation, the window of opportunity to enter into negotiation for long term
strategic cooperation with Iran, the most reliable, strong and stable partner in the
region, is still open.
Thank you for your kind attention
6 