
Mr. Chairman, 
It gives me great pleasure to offer you at the outset my warmest congratulations on your election to the chairmanship of this important Conference. Your election confirms the great trust which the international community has in your country, Algeria, a sister-country. and in you personally with regard to leading this Conference, on which the international community puts great hope, to full success. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Five years ago we met in this room to consider the fate of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons after its expiration. The non-nuclear-weapon states parties to the Treaty had a general feeling of frustration because during the quarter century it was in force, the Treaty failed to achieve even a minimum of the hopes pinned on it, foremost of which being to put an end to both the horizontal and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons with a view to their final elimination, providing the non-nuclear-weapon States with binding and unconditional guarantees against the use or the threat of use of nuclear weapons, achieving the universality of the Treaty, and facilitating the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. After four weeks of meetings marked by pressures and promises on the part of some nuclear powers, the 1995 Conference adopted an array of resolutions that contained a package of reciprocal commitments made by both the nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon states parties to the Treaty. Nonetheless, numerous non-nuclear-weapon States delegations, including mine, expressed their reservations concerning the indefinite extension of the Treaty on the basis of non-binding promises to undertake nuclear disarmament and to achieve its universality. 
Today we meet to review the extent of the implementation of the array of resolutions adopted by the 1995 Conference. We are faced with the clear fact that while the non-nuclear-weapon states parties to the Treaty have abided by their commitments under the Treaty and the resolutions of the Extension Conference, some of the nuclear-weapon states parties to the Treaty have failed to abide by theirs: the objective of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons continues to be unattainable; there is no clear prospect of or a timetable for attaining it; we are still far from achieving the universality of the Treaty; Israel, armed with its nuclear weapons, continues its arrogant behaviour in our Arab region; no concrete steps have been taken to assure non-nuclear-weapon states parties to the Treaty against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons; and no clear progress has been achieved to assure the exercise by all the parties to the Treaty of their right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Backing out of the implementation of the provisions of the Treaty and the array of the resolutions of the extension Conference was part of an unhealthy international atmosphere governed by the policies of hegemony and an increased reliance on the doctrine of nuclear deterrence, on policies of military alliances and on the principle of "might above right", the unilateral use of force, and the constant marginalization of the United Nations and its mechanisms. When these mechanisms are used at all, it is only to achieve the political interest of the dominating great power: such is the case with regard to the comprehensive sanctions imposed on Iraq and the use of inspection activities in Iraq for American intelligence purposes. 
We in the Arab world, have additional causes for concern due to the non-implementation of the Middle East Resolution of the extension conference of 1995. We are faced with a clear and present danger that is threatening us and subjecting us all to blackmail on a daily basis, that is the Israeli nuclear weapons. No action has been taken to force Israel to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and place its facilities under the safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) while Israel continues to build up its nuclear capability and practice a policy of hegemony. In an interview with Al-Hayat daily newspaper on 29 March 2000, Shimon Perez, the architect of the Israeli nuclear programme, said: "When l made the nuclear choice, I didn't have Hiroshima in mind; I made it to reach Oslo. " He then added: "We are not infatuated with military force; but make no mistake about it: if we have to use force, we will. " 
Recent reports have revealed that Israel's nuclear arsenal includes advanced and sophisticated systems of tactical and strategic weapons built with the help of the United States. The latest manifestation of American sponsorship of the Israeli nuclear program is the agreement concluded by Israel with the United States on 22 February 2000, which gives Israeli experts access to American nuclear facilities and allows them to make use of American experience and expertise to develop Israel's nuclear technology. In addition, Israel has turned into a backdoor for transferring American nuclear technology to other parties; and we all remember that the apartheid regime in South Africa acquired its nuclear bomb with the help of Israeli expertise. 
It is unfair to have the Arabs stay bound for perpetuity by a Treaty that provides them with no guarantee against Israeli nuclear weapons while Israel continues to develop its nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction with no control whatsoever. 
The international community and its organizations have the legal responsibility to force Israel to join the NPT and place its nuclear facilities under the IAEA's safeguards regime. This responsibility emanates from the provisions relating to the objectives of the Treaty the provisions of the extension Conference's resolution on the Middle East. as well as from the General Assembly and Security Council resolutions' including SC Resolution 487(1981) which was adopted after the Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear reactor placed under the IAEA's safeguards regime, calling upon Israel to place its nuclear facilities under the safeguards regime, and Security Council resolution 687(1991) adopted under chapter VII of the Charter, paragraph 14 of which considered the measures taken by Iraq as set out in paragraphs 8-13 of the same resolution to be steps towards the goal of the establishment in the region of the Middle East of a nuclear-weapon-free zone as well as a zone free of weapons of mass destruction. I should also like to recall here the resolution adopted by the XIII Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement held on 8 and 9 April 2000 in Cartagena, Colombia, which states the following: 
"We express great concern over the acquisition of nuclear capability by Israel which poses a serious and continuing threat to the security of neighbouring and other States and we condemn Israel for continuing to develop and stockpile nuclear arsenals. We are of the view that stability cannot be achieved in a region where massive imbalances in military capabilities are maintained particularly through the possession of nuclear weapons which allow one party to threaten its neighbours and the region. ', 
This Conference is therefore called upon to adopt specific recommendations to facilitate the full implementation of the Middle East resolution of the extension conference of 1995 and send a clear message to Israel to accede to the Treaty without any further delay and place all its nuclear facilities under the IAEA's safeguards regime. Arab Group working paper submitted to the Second Main Committee of this conference contains the appropriate mechanism to achieve this goal. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Attempts by the United States to intrude the issue of Iraq's relationship with the Security Council on the conference agenda aim to distract the Conference from the Israeli Nuclear Weapons and from the United States own violation of its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty through various practices including supplying nuclear technology to Israel, the deployment of nuclear weapons in non nuclear weapon States parties to the Treaty, its refusal to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and its intention to develop the "Star Wars" Programme in violation of its obligations under the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM), also through its insistence on the continuation of comprehensive regime of sanctions on Iraq, which is tantamount to the use of weapons of mass destruction. Those sanctions killed 1.5 million Iraqi civilians a figure much higher than the total number of victims of all use of weapons of mass destruction throughout the history of mankind. 
In order to clarify the facts relating to the subject of Iraq I should like to state the following: 
1. Iraq is in full compliance with all its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and IAEA's safeguards regime. In the period from 22 to 25 January 2000, a team of IAEA inspectors visited Iraq within the framework of the safeguards agreement signed between Iraq and the IAEA. Upon the conclusion of the inspection, the IAEA issued on 24 March 2000 a statement in which it affirmed that Iraq had given its full cooperation to the Inspection Team and that all nuclear materials had been verified and found to be in agreement with the IAEA inventory. Resumption by the IAEA of its inspection activities in Iraq within the framework of the safeguards agreement comes after the IAEA fulfilled its disarmament tasks in Iraq in accordance with Resolution 687(1991), paragraph 17 of the IAEA Director General's report dated 7 October 1998(S/1998/927) to the Security Council highlights this fact as follows: 
" As reported in detail in the progress report dated 8 October 1997 (document 5/1997/779), and based on ad credible information available to date, the Agency's verification activities in Iraq have resulted in the evolution of a technically coherent picture of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme. The verification activities have revealed no indications that Iraq had achieved its programme objective of producing nuclear weapons or that Iraq had produced more than a few grams of weapon-usable nuclear material or had clandestinely acquired such material. Furthermore, there are no indications that there remains in Iraq any physical capability for production of weapon-usable nuclear material of any practical significance. In February 1994, IAEA completed the removal from Iraq of all weapon-usable nuclear material - essentially research reactor fuel - under IAEA safeguards." 
2. The activities of the IAEA and the defunct Special Committee (UNSCOM) have been used as a cover for prolonging the embargo imposed on Iraq and achieving certain political aims of the United States, a matter which constitutes a serious deviation from their mandates as specified by the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Senior officials of the American Administration directed the inspection and monitoring activities in Iraq and obtained there from information relating to the security and leadership of Iraq. Agents of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) participated in the inspection and monitoring activities in Iraq, one of whom, as an example, being the American David Kay, who headed an IAEA inspection team who transmitted to Washington all information the IAEA obtained from inspection activities in Iraq. Their aim was to hatch conspiracies against Iraq and its leadership. They also installed eavesdropping and spying instruments to monitor and observe the movements and communications of Iraqi officials. The inspection and monitoring regime in Iraq was a tool in the hands of the American Administration which directed it in accordance with the dictates of its own interests. It has thus caused serious damage to the credibility of the IAEA and the United Nations and their role in verification as well as an equally serious damage to the interests of Iraq by continuing the embargo which is a veritable genocide being committed in the name of the United Nations. Iraq demands to be compensated for the damage it has suffered as a result of these acts of aggression; it also demands that those responsible for the aggression against its security and safety be punished and that the Conference include among its recommendations paragraphs that clearly condemn the exploitation of the activities of the IAEA for political purposes and emphasize compliance with neutrality and impartiality in the work of that Agency. 
3. The United States and Britain, both of which are depositories of the NPT and Permanent Members of the Security Council have used Depleted Uranium in their aggression against Iraq in 1991 and again in their aggression against Yugoslavia in 1999 although they knew beforehand the disastrous effects the use of such a radiological weapon will have on human beings and the environment in the areas where it is used, to say nothing of its effects on thousands of American and British troops who are suffering now from the Gulf syndrome. The Americans and the British used more than 300 tons of ammunitions of Depleted Uranium against Iraq, causing pollution by radiation to Iraq's environment and increasing ten times the registered cases of cancer, especially among children. The radioactive effects of Depleted Uranium will continue for centuries to come unless action is taken to free Iraq's environment from this radioactive material. We invite the Conference to include in its resolutions a call for the prohibition of the use of Depleted Uranium for armament purposes, and we also invite the IAEA to take concrete steps to help Iraq reduce the negative effects of this disaster on the environment and human life and affirm Iraq's right to demand compensation for this unjustified use against it of this weapon of mass destruction. 
4. Mr. Richard Butler withdrew the IAEA inspectors from Iraq on two occasions, once in November 1998 and another time on 15 December 1998, upon instructions received from senior American Administration officials and without the authorization of the Security Council or the Secretary General of the UN or even the Director General of the IAEA. Those who refer to the cessation of activities in Iraq since 16 December 1998 should remember this fact if they wish to be objective and deal with the causes and consequences of this serious measure that was aimed at facilitating military aggression against Iraq. 
5. Only hours after the departure of the inspectors from Iraq, two states depositories of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, namely the United States and Britain, waged on 16 December 1998 a full aggression against Iraq, in the course of which they directed air strikes at the sites placed under the monitoring regime of the IAEA and the defunct Special Committee and destroyed those sites together with the monitoring instruments installed therein such as cameras and sensors. In addition to being an illegitimate use of force against an independent State without the authorization of the Security Council, that aggression gave a fatal blow to the IAEA's monitoring regime in Iraq, and the Conference is called upon to condemn these acts of aggression and compensate Iraq for the damage it has suffered as a result thereof. It is to be noted in this connection that a previous blow directed at the IAEA's safeguards regime was Israel's aggression in 1981 against the Iraqi nuclear reactor devoted to peaceful purposes. In its resolution 487(1981), the Security Council condemned that aggression and demanded that Israel place its nuclear facilities under the IAEA's comprehensive safeguards regime, but that resolution continues to be mere ink on paper. We hope that the Conference will take an explicit position prohibiting military attacks against nuclear facilities placed under the IAEA's safeguards regime. 
Mr. Chairman, 
While referring to these facts, I would like to bring to your attention that the background papers submitted by the IAEA and the Secretariat of the United Nations have failed to make any reference to these facts, on the contrary, the background papers submitted lay the Secretariat of the U.N. have gone very far in presenting a distorted picture of the Iraqi situation, exhuming the past in a selective fashion that bespeaks total surrender to the American master. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Our delegation will endeavour together with other delegations to have this Conference come up with the kind of resolutions that will respond to the concerns of the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty and open the prospect of the proper implementation of all its provisions. On the other hand, experience has proved that a Conference's decisions and its calls are not enough by themselves. We therefore urge all States parties to the Treaty that are genuinely concerned with the full achievement of its objectives to intensify their efforts on all levels to increase their peoples' awareness of the threats to humankind posed by nuclear weapons. In this connection, we welcome the international and regional initiatives in the area of nuclear disarmament, including the initiative of Egypt, South Africa, Mexico, New Zealand, Brazil, Ireland and Sweden as represented by the working paper entitled "Nuclear Disarmament" they have submitted to the Conference. We also welcome the Russian Parliament's decision to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the START II Treaty. Furthermore, we must stress the legal and moral responsibility requiring those who possess such weapons to eliminate them at the earliest time. This necessitates a campaign to be undertaken at the grassroots level and through the media with the participation of States and regional and non-governmental organizations. We must say to those nuclear States that try to teach the peoples of the world lessons in democracy and human rights that the first principles of democracy and human rights are the equality of all human beings on the level of security and safety, and that they should save their preachments for themselves until the time when they will declare that they have ceased to possess such weapons capable to annihilate hundred times the life on earth. We have a great deal to do after the end of this Conference. We must make of the goal of the elimination of nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction an incessant, daily demand; nay, we must adopt it as the standard by which to measure the extent to which States have abided by their commitments under all international treaties and conventions. We must light a great many candles rather than limit ourselves to cursing the darkness.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
