Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
Statement by H.E. Mr. Gerard Corr,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Ireland
Mr. Chairman,
I congratulate you on your election as Chair and assure you of Ireland’s full support and
cooperation in what we hope will be a productive two weeks.
Ireland associates itself fully with the statements delivered by the European Union, by Brazil
on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition, by Australia on behalf of the Vienna Group of 10
and with the joint statement on the humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament.
We are now half way through the preparatory process leading to the 2015 Review
Conference. At the 2010 Review Conference, we agreed an ambitious and forward-looking
set of conclusions and recommendations for action across all three of the Treaty’s pillars and
on the Middle East. Last year’s PrepCom got this cycle off to a smooth start. It is important
that we now move quickly to substantive matters. We have a lot of work to do. With calm
and constructive discussions at this PrepCom and next year in New York, we can achieve an
ambitious outcome at the 2015 Review Conference. The process of mapping out how to
achieve this must begin now.
Unfortunately, we remain some distance from achieving full implementation of the NPT. If
we are to be faithful to our obligations under the Treaty, we must do more to achieve progress
across all three pillars, in a genuinely balanced way. The 2010 Action Plan offers a basis for
doing just that. It is important, therefore, that we monitor carefully progress under its
different headings if we are to implement the Action Plan by 2015, as agreed.
Our record at implementing what we agree is mixed. In particular, progress on implementing
disarmament obligations under the NPT remains disappointing. The original bargain was that
the nuclear weapons states would disarm their arsenals, in return for which the non nuclear
weapons states would not acquire these weapons. For the majority here in this room, who
have kept their side of this bargain, it is frustrating that the other side of the bargain has not
yet been met.
The wider UN community’s sense of frustration at the slow pace of disarmament is clear.
We see this in the decision of the General Assembly last year to create – by overwhelming
majority votes – two new mechanisms to take forward discussions on issues which the
Conference on Disarmament has been unable or unwilling to take forward over many years. 
We see it, also, in the General Assembly’s decision to convene a High Level Meeting on
nuclear disarmament later this year. And we see it in the groundswell of support for a
meaningful discussion around the humanitarian impact of a nuclear detonation, whether this
is caused by accident, miscalculation or design.
Ireland welcomes the constructive meeting held in Oslo in March, and looks forward to the
follow-on Conference later this year in Mexico. The clear message which emerged from
Oslo is that humanity would be powerless to respond to the uniquely destructive power which
a nuclear detonation would unleash. We encourage the nuclear weapons states to engage in
this process. Their absence from Oslo was, perhaps, a missed opportunity and we hope they
will be present in Mexico.
Mr. Chairman,
As we look to 2015, transparency will be a key element for a successful Review Conference.
Forty three years after entry into force, the wider NPT membership is not able to speak with
precision about the number of weapons in existence. It is equally unacceptable for any State
Party to maintain a policy of opacity about the size of its arsenal. We call upon the nuclear
weapons states to move quickly to agree upon and use a standard reporting form, to
demonstrate maximum transparency.
Next year’s reporting from the nuclear weapons states on the implementation of their
commitment to accelerate progress towards nuclear disarmament will be crucial. We
encourage them to achieve greater transparency, going beyond the steps already taken
thereby building confidence in their commitment to disarm.
We call on the nuclear weapons states to show leadership by making deep reductions in their
weapons arsenals. This would be a clear demonstration of their commitment to the
unequivocal undertaking they gave at the 2000 Review Conference to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals, as required by Article VI. Pending these reductions,
which should of course be verifiable and irreversible, we call on the nuclear weapons states to
downgrade the role of nuclear weapons in their security postures. This would represent a
strong confidence-building measure – both among the five and for the rest of the world.
Reducing alert levels is an important element of this. Current alert levels are excessive,
increasing the risk of unintended deployment – whether by accident or miscalculation, or
because of lack of information. We must ask ourselves is it really necessary to maintain these
weapons on high alert.
Mr Chairman,
The DPRK represents the most serious nuclear proliferation challenge facing us today and we
condemn and deplore the recent weapons and missile testing by Pyongyang. We call upon
the DPRK to desist from any further provocative actions and to return to full compliance with
its obligations under the NPT and its IAEA safeguards agreement. It is essential that the
international community remains unified and resolute in its opposition to nuclear weapons
proliferation. We must continue to urge the DPRK to re-engage in talks on the denuclearisation
of the Korean peninsula, immediately and without pre-conditions.
Regrettably, there is a familiar ring to the language of deterrence with which the DPRK
attempts to justify its efforts to develop nuclear weapons. Progress on disarmament would
remove any possible perceived incentive for a State to respond to a nuclear weapons
capability by developing its own retaliatory capability. Disarmament and non-proliferation
are mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT. The nuclear weapons states have a special
responsibility to take action. We encourage them to show leadership by moving quickly to
make meaningful reductions in their arsenals, through a process of bilateral and multilateral
negotiations. We fear that failure to do so will place the NPT’s non-proliferation objectives
under intolerable pressure, something none of us can afford.
The DPRK’s actions also highlight the urgent need for entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We call on the remaining Annex 2 states whose ratification is
needed to achieve this to sign and ratify the Treaty without delay. Here again, we ask States
to show leadership. Do not wait for others to ratify.
While the CTBT has not yet entered into force, it represents an overwhelming international
consensus against nuclear weapons testing that each of us has a duty to protect. We expect
all nations – including the DPRK – to respect this international consensus.
Mr Chairman,
In concluding, Mr. Chairman, I would like to refer to ongoing efforts to achieve a zone free
of nuclear weapons, as well as of other weapons of mass destruction, in the Middle East.
Ireland remains strongly supportive of this process. We regret that it was not possible to
convene the proposed Conference on a zone within 2012, as intended. Agreement that this
should happen was a key outcome of the 2010 Review Conference and it is important that we
make good on that agreement. Progress towards full implementation of the 1995 Middle East
Resolution – which remains an essential element of the basis on which the Treaty was
extended – is long overdue and the agreement of 2010 offered a series of practical steps in the
right direction.
We thank the Conference Facilitator for his tireless efforts to create the conditions for a
successful Conference, and we commend the seriousness with which States of the region
have approached this endeavour. While we understand and share disappointment at the
delay, we believe it is more important for all States of the region to stay the course and to
continue to engage constructively, with the Facilitator and among themselves, so that the
Conference can be convened at the earliest possible opportunity.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT offers us a blueprint for a world free of nuclear weapons. It is time that we started
work on the foundations, be it a single, universal and multilaterally-negotiated instrument or
a framework of mutually reinforcing instruments. It is vital that the entire NPT membership
continues to work on delivering the Treaty’s non-proliferation agenda. It is equally important
that the nuclear weapons states acknowledge that only they can deliver on its disarmament
agenda. We look to them to show us they are serious about doing so, beginning with this
meeting.
Thank you.