IRELAND
Statement by
Mr Charles Flanagan, T.D.
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
at the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
New York, 27 April 2015
Check against delivery
PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELANDTOTHE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TELEPHONE 212 421-6934 FAX 212 752-4726
newyorkpmun@dfa.ie 
Madam President,
At the outset, Ireland would like to convey its sincere condolences to the Government and
people of Nepal on the terrible loss of life and injuries arising from the recent earthquake.
Ireland will help where we can.
Please allow me to offer my warmest congratulations on your election as President of this
Conference. I can assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation in your efforts to
achieve a positive outcome.
Ireland works very closely with colleagues in the New Agenda Coalition. The NAC will
address this conference and has tabled two Working Papers and Ireland fully associates itself
with both. High Representative Mogherini will speak later about the EU's shared belief in the
vital importance of strengthening all three pillars of the NPT, to which Ireland fully subscribes.
This year is a particularly important and sombre milestone - it marks 70 years from the end of
the Second World War and the terrible scenes of devastation in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Unfortunately, the risk of a nuclear detonation remains as real today as it did 70 years ago. In
fact, I would say we have reached a turning point for the Treaty, and 1 will say more about this
shortly.
This year also marks the 60th anniversary oflreland's membership of the UN. Right from our
very first days in this distinguished community, Ireland has been deeply concerned with the
threat posed by nuclear weapons. Ireland was the initiator of the Resolutions at the United
Nations which led to the negotiation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. We have
advocated strongly since then that all provisions of the Treaty should be fully honoured and
implemented.
Suggestions that there is an equivalence of achievement with regard to multilateral nuclear
disarmament compared with the other two pillars of the NPT are simply not supported by the
facts. On the contrary, the imbalance across the three pillars is increasing.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was originally motivated by the concern about the
human cost of the detonation of anyone of the 80,000 nuclear weapons then in existence.
Despite considerable reductions, which we welcome and acknowledge, we cannot shy away
from the fact that 17,000 of these weapons still exist, with few prospects in the short or medium
term for further voluntary reductions outside of the Treaty.
We welcome recent efforts to reach agreement on Iran's nuclear programme, and we strongly
hope this agreement is confirmed by all the parties. This would mark a significant achievement
for the non-proliferation pillar ofthe NPT. 
It should also, in my view, add to the impetus for urgent discussions about effective measures
for eliminating the nuclear weapons still in existence - discussions which of course are an
obligation under Article VI.
Madam President,
The 20 I 0 Review Conference unanimously declared deep concern at the "catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons". Since then, the humanitarian
dimension has moved to the very centre of the international deliberations on nuclear
disarmament, exactly where it should be. Ireland is very grateful to the Governments of
Norway, Mexico and Austria for their leadership in hosting major international conferences on
the topic. The Vienna Conference last December was attended by almost 160 countries.
The evidence presented there showed, very clearly in my view, that the risks of a nuclear
detonation are greater than we realised; that the capacity to cope with such an event is
hopelessly inadequate and that the appalling consequences for life on this planet would be
disproportionately worse for women and children than for men.
In a personal message to the Vienna Conference, UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon said that
"The more we understand about the humanitarian impacts, the more it becomes clear that we
must pursue disarmament as an urgent imperative. "
Pope Francis also sent a personal statement to the Conference saying "Nuclear deterrence and
the threat of mutually assured destruction cannot be the basis for an ethic of fraternity and
peaceful co-existence among peoples and states. The youth of today and tomorrow deserve far
more" ,
Austria made a Pledge to present the ftndings of the Vienna Conference to this assembly and
to highlight the horror of these weapons and the ever-present risks and dangers they represent
- risks and dangers which all our citizens are entitled to know about.
The New Agenda Coalition has submitted a new working paper (0 this Review Conference,
which highlights the possible legal pathways for pursuing the effective measures for nuclear
disarmament mandated by Article VI of the NPT. It is a constructive and cogent document
which does not seek to prescribe the particular legal instrument to be pursued or the forum in
which discussions on effective measures should take place. I encourage you all to study this
paper and to reflect urgently on what we can do at this Review Conference to move closer to
meeting our joint obligation under Article VI of the Treaty.
We are at a crossroads.
We need to acknowledge that not a single nuclear weapon has been disarmed under the NPT
or as part of any multilateral process, and that there are no structures in place for this to happen.
If the Treaty is to retain legitimacy, then surely the effective measures it explicitly requires for
disarmament under Article VI must be put in place within the coming review cycle, before the
Treaty's fiftieth Anniversary in 2020. 
Madam President,
The non-proliferation pillar of the NPT stands between us and a nuclear weapons free-for-all.
Ireland has consistently argued for a balanced implementation across all three pillars of the
NPT, and we attach equal importance to the non-proliferation provisions of the Treaty, both on
their own merits and as a contribution to the goal of disarmament.
We also wish to reaffirm the central importance ofthe lAEA's safeguards system to the nuclear
non-proliferation regime. Together with many states present here, Ireland is an active
participant in - and a strong supporter of - several export control regimes, the aim of which is
to counter the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology, materials or know-how.
While Ireland has chosen not to include nuclear power in its energy mix, we recognise the right
of all State Parties to the NPT to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under Article IV of
the Treaty, subject to full compliance with the non-proliferation and verification requirements
of the Treaty. We also support the initiative of the IAEA to promote peaceful uses of nuclear
energy as mentioned earlier by Secretary of State Kerry. We are pleased to contribute
financially to this work.
At the 2010 Review Conference, considerable work was done to bring forward the prospect for
a Middle East Zone free of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons of Mass Destruction.
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to bring this work to fruition in the form of a Conference
in the intervening period despite untiring efforts by the Facilitator.
However, I strongly hope that this Review Conference will give us the impetus to overcome
the final remaining hurdles. The benefits to the region, and to the world at large, make the effort
both necessary and worthwhile.
Madam President,
We also need to discuss the important need for women to be given agency in relation to the
discussions on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament. For every 2 men who die of
cancer due to exposure to radiation as a consequence of a nuclear weapon detonation, three
women will die. The disproportionate effect on children is even greater and is highest for
female children.
For these reasons, Ireland will organise a side event next Tuesday 5 May which will study
gender and nuclear weapons, from the dual viewpoint of the disproportionate impact and the
evident need for women's voices to be heard clearly and given equal weight in the nuclear
weapons debate. 
We are given the opportunity every 5 years to review the implementation of the Nuclear NonProliferation
Treaty. We owe it to our citizens to ensure that their welfare and safety remain
paramount in our discussions on achieving a world without nuclear weapons. Every time we
defer constructive multilateral discussions about reaching that goal, we fail our citizens and
continue to put them at risk. We must re-double our efforts to ensure not just that others refrain
from developing nuclear weapons but that such weapons are never used again under any
circumstances and that a process is started now to put all nuclear weapons beyond use for good.
Thank you
ENDS  