1
IRELAND
General	Debate
Statement by
Ambassador	Michael	Gaffey,
Permanent	Representative	of	Ireland	to	the	United	Nations	and	
other	International	Organisations	in	Geneva
At	the
2018 Preparatory	Conference	of	the	Parties	to	the	Treaty	on	the	
Non-Proliferation	of	Nuclear	Weapons	(NPT)
Geneva,	24	April,	2018
Check	against	Delivery	
2
Mr.	Chairman	
Ireland	aligns	with	the	statements	made	by	the	European	Union,	by	
the	New	Agenda	Coalition	and	by	the	Vienna	Group	of	Ten.
Ireland	would	like	 to	congratulate	you	on	your	chairmanship	of	our	
committee	 and	 to	 wish	 you	 well	 in	 your	 important	 work.	 	 I	 would	
also	 like	 to	 thank	 you	 for	 the	 inclusive	 and	 useful	 preparatory	
consultations	 which	 you	 have	 undertaken,	 building	 on	 the	 work	 of	
Ambassador	 Henk	 Cor	 Van	 der	 Kwast	 whose	 excellent	 draft	
Chairman’s	 summary	from	 last	 year	 gives	 us	 a	 solid foundation	 for	
our	 vital	 work	 over	 the	 next	 two	 weeks.	 	 Let	 me	 assure	 you	 Mr	
Chairman	of	my	delegation’s	intention	 to	give	you	and	your	bureau	
every	 assistance	 in	 bringing	 our	 work	 to	 a	 successful conclusion,	
including	by	keeping	within	your	time	limits!
Ireland	also	welcomes	the	strong	representation	from	Civil	Society	at	
the	 conference	 and	 believes	 their	 expertise	 and full	 and	 active	
engagement	will enrich	our	discussions	here.
Mr	Chairman,
3
In	1958,	when	Ireland’s	Foreign	Minister,	Frank	Aiken,	introduced	to	
the	 United	 Nations	 the	 first	 of	 the	 Irish	 resolutions	 which	 would	
eventually	 lead	 to	 the	 adoption	 of	 the	 non-proliferation	 Treaty ten	
years	later,	 the	 prospect	 of	a	world	where	many	actors,	States	and	
non-State,	would	eventually	acquire	 the	means	and	 the	 technology	
to	 build	 their	 own	 nuclear	 arsenals	 was	 very	 real.	 	 In	 that	 speech,	
which	remains	as	prescient	and	true	today	as	it	was	sixty	years	ago,	
Frank	 Aiken	 speaks	 of	 how	 “Weapons,	 which	 are	 the	 monopoly	 of	
the	great	powers	today,	become	the	weapons	of	smaller	powers	and	
revolutionary	groups	tomorrow”.		
As the	NPT	reaches	 50,	 we	 can	 agree	 that	the	 Treaty	 has achieved	
many	 of	its	 objectives.	 Very	 few	States	 have	 remained	 outside	 the	
Treaty	and	gone	on	to	develop	Nuclear	Weapons.	 The	Five	Nuclear	
Weapons	 States	 have	 all	 joined	 it	 and	 are	 therefore	 bound	 by the	
commitment	contained	within	its	Article	VI	 to	nuclear	disarmament	
which	remains	the	core	legal	obligation binding	the	nuclear	weapons	
States	 to	 disarm, a commitment	 reiterated	 by	 the	 unequivocal	
undertaking	 they	 gave	 in	 2000	 to	 accomplish	 the	 total	 abolition	 of	
their	nuclear	weapons.
Additionally,	the	States	of	many	regions	of	the	world,	have chosen	to	
be	part	of	Nuclear	Weapons	Free	Zones,	in	strong	demonstration	of	
4
their	 commitment	 to	 the	 objective	 of	 a	 world	 without	 nuclear	
weapons.	 More	 recently,	almost	 two	 thirds	of	 the	UN	membership	
voted	 last	 July	 to	 adopt	 the	 Treaty	 on	 the	 Prohibition	 of	 Nuclear	
Weapons.
The	 NPT	 itself	 is	 a	 slim	 Treaty,	 its	 preamble	 and	 11 Articles	 fitting	
easily	 on	 6	 A4	 pages.	 	 But	 the	 international	 community	 has	 built	
around	 it	 a	 strong	 framework	 of	 supporting	 institutions. The	
International	Atomic	Energy	Agency,	in	particular,	 though	predating	
and	independent	from	the	NPT,	has	built	up	an	impressive	structure	
of	 expertise	 and	 an	 enabling	 framework	 to	 facilitate the	 use	 of	
nuclear	 technology for	 peaceful	purposes	while	implementing	 strict	
safeguards	 which	 prevent	 diversion	 to	 non-peaceful	 uses.	 Likewise,
the	CTBTO	has	greatly	strengthened	and	enhanced	the	norm	against	
nuclear	 testing,	 particularly	 through	 the	 development	 of	 the	
international	monitoring	system.
With	 the	 development	 of	 supporting	 export	 control	 regimes,	
including	 the	 Nuclear	 Suppliers	 Group	 and	 the	 Missile	 Technology	
Control	Regime,	States	have	been	successfully	assisted	in	preventing
and	 inhibiting proliferation	 of	 nuclear	 weapons	 and	 ballistic	missile	
technology	without	preventing	transfers	of	technology	and	materials	
for	peaceful	uses.
5
This	 aspect	 of	 the	 Treaty	 is	 also	 an	 essential	 one	 to	 which	 States	
Parties	 need	 to	 continue	 to	 give	 careful	 support	 and	 attention.	
Ireland	 has	 been	 pleased	 to	 co	 chair,	 with	 Iceland,	 the	 missile	
technology	control	regime	this	year	and	to	have	hosted	a	successful	
plenary	meeting	of	the	partners	in	Dublin	last	October.
The	NPT has	also helped	 to	promote	and	give	impetus	 to	many farreaching
 agreements	 and	 understandings	 aimed	 at	 preventing	
further	 proliferation	 and	 enabling bilateral	 nuclear disarmament
including	 the	welcome	 reductions	achieved	 through	 the	INF,	 START	
and	NEW	START	treaties.	
The adoption	 of	 the	 Treaty	 on	 the	 Prohibition	 of	Nuclear Weapons	
represents the	 NPT’s	 latest	 success	 story	 and	 the	 first	 new	 legal	
instrument	on	nuclear	disarmament	to	be	adopted	in	over	20	years.		
A	success	story	not	only	because	of	 the	ground-breaking	content	of	
the	 Treaty,	 but	 because	 of	 what	 it	 entails	 in	 terms	 of	 progress	
towards	 the	 fulfilment	of	 the	NPT’s	Disarmament	provisions. Article	
VI	 of	 the	 NPT	 expressly	 envisaged	 a	 separate	 and	 complementary	
“treaty	 on	 general	 and	 complete	 disarmament	 under	 strict	 and	
6
effective	international	control.” Ireland	looks	forward to	the	Treaty’s	
early	entry	into	force	so	that	it	can	begin	its	important	work.
Mr	Chairman,
In	addition	 to	 the	TPNW,	 there	have	been other welcome	advances	
in	nuclear	disarmament	and	arms	control	in	recent	years,	including in	
particular	the	JCPOA	with	Iran	in	2015,	a	major	achievement	for	the	
NPT	and	the	international	community.
But	 huge	 challenges	 confront	 us.	 The	 JCPOA,	 negotiated	 with	 such	
effort	 and	 attention,	 and	 despite	 careful	 and	 positive	
implementation	assessment	by	the	IAEA,	is	under	threat.
Meanwhile,	 Nuclear Disarmament	 by	 the	 NPT	 Nuclear	 Weapons	
States	 has	 stalled.	 Bilateral	 nuclear	 disarmament	 between	 the	 US	
and	Russian	Federation,	following	the	successes	of	the	INF	and	New	
Start	 has	 halted.	 After	 the	 successful	 outcome	 of	 the	 NPT’s	 2010
Review	 Conference	 and	 far-reaching	 Action Plan, the	 2015	 Review	
Conference	 did	 not	 agree	 an	 outcome.	 The	 CTBT	 has	 not	 entered	
into	 force and	 nuclear	 testing	 by	 DPRK	 has	 challenged	 and	
undermined	 the	global	norm	against	nuclear	 testing.	Modernization	
and	investment	in	nuclear	arsenals	is	rising	in	all	NWS	and	efforts	to	
7
reduce	 the	 salience	of	nuclear	weapons	in	military	doctrines	and	in	
nuclear	 alliances	 has	 receded.	 Proliferation	 threats	 are	 increasing	
with	 DPRK’s	 nuclear	 program,	 despite	 recent	 welcome	
developments,	representing	a	particularly	dangerous	development.	
Against	 this	 background	 the	 norm	 against	 the	 threat	 of	 use	 of	
nuclear	weapons	has	been	 seriously	eroded.	Even	more	worryingly,	
consideration	seems	to	be	given	to	the	use	of nuclear	weapons	other	
than	as	a	deterrent.
Against	this challenging	background, and	in	a	moment	when	we	have	
seen	 disarray	and	lack	 of	agreement	at	 the	United	Nations	Security	
Council	on	an	 issue	on	which	 there	 should	 be	overwhelming	global	
agreement	and abhorrence	such	as	Chemical	Weapons	use, it	seems	
utopian	to	suggest	that	we,	the	NPT State’s	Parties	should	renew	our	
efforts	to	engage	with	each	other	and	genuinely	find	ways	forward	to	
overcome	 the	 divisions	 on	 approaches	 to	 nuclear	 disarmament	
which	have	become	evident	in	recent	years.
But	 that	 is	 exactly	 what	 we	 need	 to	 do.	 	 If	 the	 NPT	 could	 be	
negotiated	 and	 adopted	 at	 the	 height	 of	 the	 cold	 war,	 then	 a	
8
renewed	 commitment	 to	its	implementation	and	 the	establishment	
of	genuine	dialogue	among	its	States	Parties	is	more	than	possible.
My	 colleague	 from	 New	 Zealand,	 speaking	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 New	
Agenda	 Coalition	 has	 set	 out all	 the	 steps	 and	 actions	 to	 which	 we	
are	 all	 agreed	 and	 signed	 up	 to.	 	 Ireland is	 anxious	 to	 get	 down	 to	
work	and	make	 progress,	within	 the	NPT,	 on	 these	 issues.	We	 look	
now	Mr	 Chairman	 to	 the	 Nuclear	Weapons	 States.	With	 two	 years	
left	in	this	Review	Cycle	the	time	for	action	is	now.		We	would, given	
increasing	 international	 tensions,	 and	 the	 heightened	 risk	 of	 an	
actual	 nuclear	 weapons	 detononation with	 the	 catastrophic	
humanitarian	 consequences	 so	 clearly	 set	 out	 in	 the	 humanitarian	
initiative,	 particularly	 welcome	 work	 on	 risk	 reduction	 such	 as	 dealerting,
as	a	matter	 of	 urgency.	 	We	would	also	encourage	 the	US	
and	the	Russian	Federation,	as	the	holders	of	the	largest	arsenals,	to	
reengage	on	a	successor	agreement	to	New	Start.
Another	urgent	issue	is	the	question	of	The	Middle	East	Zone	free	of	
Weapons	 of	 Mass	 Destruction	 and	 their	 Means	 of	 Delivery.	 As	 we	
reach	the	mid-point	of	the	Review	cycle	with	little	or	no	progress,	it	
is	 time	 for	 a	 serious	 stocktaking	 and	 reassessment	 of	 how	 we	 can	
achieve	some	progress,	in	spite	of	 the	challenges	and	difficulties	on	
this	issue.		Otherwise,	 the	 risk	 that	 the	 2020	 Review	 Cycle	will	also	
9
fail	to	agree	an	outcome	is	strong	with	a	resulting	strongly	negative	
impact	on	 the	Treaty.	Ireland	will	 host	a	 side	event,	with	BASIC,	 on	
the	Zone	on	May	1st and	we	look	forward	to	engaging	creatively	with	
all	 interested	 parties	 then.	 Trust	 and	 confidence	 are	 key	 to	 the	
success	of	any	negotiation,	and	this	is	what	we	need	most	of	all.
To	establish	that	trust,	we	need	to	begin	a	dialogue	to	find	what	can	
bring	us	nearer	to	the	realization	of	our	mutual	goal,	a	world	without	
nuclear	weapons	and	a	successful	outcome	to	the	2020	Review	cycle.	
There	 are	 already	 some green shoots	 in	 the	 Chairman’s	 draft	
summary	 of last	 year’s	 preparatory	 meeting,	 including	 the	
recognition	of	gendered	impacts	of	nuclear	weapons	and	the	need	to	
increase	 women’s	 participation	 in	 nuclear	 disarmament	 forums.
Ireland	looks	 forward	 to	launching	our	new	Working	Paper:		Impact	
and	Empowerment- the	Role	of	gender	in	 the	NPT,	at	an	event	 this	
evening.	
This	 paper,	 and	 another	 working	 paper	 on	 Nuclear	 Weapons	 and	
Environmental	Law	which	we	will	present	with	Chatham	House	at	a	
side	 event	 on	 Friday	 are	 the	 latest	 work	 in	 our	 ongoing	 project	
“Nuclear	 Disarmament,	 the	 Missing	 Link	 in	 Multilateralism”	 which	
10
aims	to	bring	nuclear	disarmament	and	non-proliferation	out	of	 the	
security	 and	 disarmament	 silos	 and	 connect	 them	 to	 the	
international	community’s	other	high	level	goals.
Mr	Chairman	
Ireland	 continues	 to	 believe	 60	years	after	Frank	Aiken	 first	 set	 out	
his	 vision	 of	 a	 nuclear	 weapon	 free	 world,	 that	 such	 a	 world	 is	
possible.	We	believe	that	it	is	urgent,	50	years	after	the	opening	for	
signature	of	the	NPT,	that	we	all	re-engage	to	achieve	that world.	
Speaking	 earlier	 this	 month	 on	 the	 twentieth	 anniversary	 of	 the	
Good	 Friday	 Agreement,	 which	 brought	 peace	 to	 Northern	 Ireland	
after	 a	 long	 and	 bloody	 conflict, Ireland’s	 Deputy	 Prime	 Minister,	
Simon	 Coveney	 said	 “renewal	 does	 not	 demand	 perfection. It	
demands	leadership,	courage	and	hard	work”.		The	NPT	also	requires	
leadership,	courage	and	hard	work and	it	needs	it	urgently.
Thank	you	