PERMANENT MISSION OF JAMAICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
STATEMENT BY
MS. SHORNA-KAY RICHARDS
CHARGÈ D’AFFAIRES, A.I.
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
PERMANENT MISSION OF JAMAICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
DURING THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR
THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK
30TH APRIL 2014 
2
Mr. Chairman,
Jamaica warmly congratulates you on your election to Chair this third Preparatory Committee
meeting and I offer you our full support and cooperation as you discharge your responsibilities.
We are pleased to align ourselves with the statements made earlier by Indonesia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and Costa Rica on behalf of CELAC.
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 Action Plan presented a tangible opportunity to deliver significant progress in
achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and justifiable optimism that
this could be done. Yet, a year before the 2015 Review Conference, optimism has waned and we
are faced with the sobering reality of very limited progress made in implementing this farreaching
Action Plan.
Many statements which have been made over the course of the past two days, have expressed
disappointment at the continuing lack of any real progress in the multilateral disarmament
agenda. We fully share these concerns
Of great concern to the Jamaican delegation is the continued disregard for, and the absence of
equal attention to the three pillars of the NPT. Equally troubling have been the attitude of the
nuclear weapons States towards their legal obligations and the continued significance of nuclear
weapons in their national security and alliance doctrines. At the same time, nuclear weapons
states and those States remaining outside of the NPT continue to develop and modernize their
nuclear arsenals further threatening international peace and security. All of this has contributed
to a heightened sense of frustration and puts at risk the delicate balance of the disarmament and
non-proliferation objectives envisaged by the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
At this final and crucial preparatory meeting, we are confronted with the questions: how do we
address the lack of concrete progress and the slow pace of implementation? How do we do we
allay legitimate fears that the indefinite extension of the Treaty is carte blanche for indefinite
possession of nuclear weapons? In response, we must make clear that the ’grand bargain’ which
enabled the coming into being of the NPT must be implemented in both letter and spirit. We,
therefore, urge the nuclear weapons States to fully comply with their obligations and
commitments under Article VI of the NPT and respond to the desire of the overwhelming
majority of States for prompt and effective measures to pursue the goal of full and verifiable
disarmament in a time bound framework, and as a matter of urgency. 
We further call on these States to enhance transparency with respect to all nuclear weapons, as
an essential confidence-building measure. Furthermore, we stress the need for the full
implementation of the concrete actions leading to nuclear disarmament in line with conclusions
and recommendations adopted at the 2000 and 2010 NPT Review Conferences.
In keeping with the adoption of UN General Assembly resolution 68/32, following on the
historic High-Level Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament, we strongly support the call for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention and a follow-up Conference by
2018. The implementation of this resolution should be given due importance by this preparatory
meeting.
Mr. Chairman,
We are deeply concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of a nuclear
detonation, whether accidental or deliberate. The indiscriminate negative and calamitous impact
on public health, the environment, food security, infrastructure, economic growth and sustainable
development, is most alarming and underscores the urgent need for a ban on these weapons. We,
therefore, join with others in placing humanitarian concerns at the forefront of the discourse on
nuclear weapons. Our participation in both the Oslo and Nayarit Conferences is a reflection of
our strong desire to see much needed progress towards the elimination of nuclear weapons; the
only way to fully ensure the prevention of a nuclear detonation. We, therefore, look forward to
the next International Conference on the Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons, to be
convened towards the end of this year in Austria.
Mr. Chairman,
Jamaica’s commitment to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation is reflected in our
participation in the Treaty of Tlateloloco. As one of the earliest signatories to the Treaty,
Jamaica has long recognized the very important role that nuclear-weapons-free-zones can play in
strengthening regional and international security through confidence-building. In this
connection, we regret the postponement of the Conference on the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, which is a key
commitment of the 2010 Review Conference. We urge that this Conference be convened without
further delay.
Mr. Chairman, Jamaica recognizes and underscores the right of all states to peaceful uses of
nuclear technology in accordance with Article IV of the NPT. At the same time, we insist that
this right must take place in full compliance with the verification and safeguards provisions of
the IAEA. The role of IAEA in providing the necessary monitoring and verification should be
respected.
We reiterate the importance of the universality of the Treaty and call on the states currently
outside the NPT framework to accede to the Treaty and place their facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards. 
4
We must also recognize the urgency of eliminating the testing of all nuclear weapons and urge
ratification by the remaining Annex II countries to enable the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Mr. Chairman, Jamaica attaches great importance to nuclear security and safety. The Fukushima
D’Aichi incident has underlined the necessity of ensuring the highest standards of nuclear safety.
This is also relevant to the transportation of nuclear material, and bearing this in mind Jamaica
reiterates its strong opposition to the shipment of nuclear waste through the Caribbean Sea,
notwithstanding the assurances given with regard to these shipments. The dialogue, within the
context of the IAEA, on measures to strengthen international cooperation in nuclear, radiation,
transport and waste safety, is timely and important.
The tasks ahead of us in this final preparatory meeting, Mr. Chairman, are urgent. In
undertaking them, we must remind ourselves that there can be no backtracking on commitments,
and that we must live up to the obligations freely undertaken. 