Permanent Mission of a an t the United Nations 866 United Nations Plaza. Nen. Vork, N.Y, 10017 (214 223 4300 - www.un_initcppani Geoeral Staltemintby H.E. Mr, Ferrule 'Uchida, fdlnIsier for Foreign Affairs of Ja.pan at the 2015 P412T Review Conference 
Before I begin :I would like to express my deepest condolences to the vlotirn3 at Wei el their fa ili rid friends in Nepal and other countries affected by the massive earthquake in Nepal. 
Madam President, 011 behalf of the GOWN-Went of Japan and its people,. I would like to o1ei you my 'heartfelt. corigrmirlalions on your election es President et the 2015 Review Conference Of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons RFT). I assure you of japan's utmost support for your chairmanship n leading this Conteren GO to a success. 
70 years ago, in my hometown HirOehirria, a single bomb took more than one hundred and thirty thousand precious Wee, Those who initially survived developed health problems and many of them lost their lives ire later years. Many survivors have said that even though they do riot want to remember their experience of the atomic bombings, they will never allow them selves to forget so that such an experience is never repeated. 
Political leaders must have an ;;bieelli-ve assessment of the security environment Of their country. But at the same time I be It Is important that we all clearly understand the humanitarian conseqences of the use of nuclear Weapons and stand by our Meals. 
▪ Minister of Foreign Affairs from Hiroshima, I keep close to my heart the hopes of atomic bomb survivors, and I am determined to achieve progress towards a world free of nuclear 'Weapons at this Review Conference. 
Madam President, Civet 16:000 nuclear weapons still in the world today, and there are also developments that run counter to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation efforts. It s time to accelerate nuclear ornament. 
As the only country to have ever steered atomic bombing, Japan attaches great Importance to strengthening the N PT regime on all three pillars of the Treaty, namely 

nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and moving closer towards a world free of nuclear weapons. To this end, I urge both nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States to take joint action. In particular, I urge the nuclear-weapon States to faithfully fulfill their special responsibility pursuant to Article VI of the Nth'. 
There are no shortcuts to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Cooperation between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States in advancing practical and concrete measures, which are outlined in the 1,1PDI proposal, is the way forward. 
Madam President, attach particular importance to the following five issues at this Review Conference. 
The first issue is transparency of nuclear force_ Nuclear weapons reduction negotiations are not possible if the number of nuclear warheads is not known. Furthermore, transparency builds confidence at the regional and international levels. We call on the nuclear-weapon States to make concrete and regular reports with numerical information. 
The second issue is deeper reduction of all types of nuclear weapons and eventual multilateralization of nuclear weapons reduction negotiations_ To date, reductions have been limited to strategic nuclear weapons possessed by the United States and Russia, but all nuclear weapons of all States possessing nuclear weapons will need to be reduced_ 
The third issue is our common recognition of humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and the unity of the international community to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. This serves as a driving force for nuclear disarmament. In this regard, I would like to mention that young Japanese are here today as "Youth Communicators for a World without Nuclear Weapons," which is a program that I established a few years ago. They are conveying beyond generations and across borders the tragedy that occurred in Hiroshima and Nagasaki_ 
Fourth is the visit to Hiroshima and Nagasaki by political leaders and youth. I would like to invite political leaders and youth, including those from nuclear-weapon States, to visit Hiroshima and Nagasaki and witness with their own eyes the reality of atomic bombings. Between July 30th and August 6th, Japan will welcome in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, approximately 24,000 young people from around the world as part of the 

