Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, please allow me to refer to an honor for Japan that Ambas ;;. Amano has been elected as the chair of the first Preparatory Committee < -2010 NPT review process. I would like to express my heartfelt thank;, Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs for their support. I atr, also dclxhc.. in Vienna, the home of the International Atomic Energy Aaeno i IAEA «. en ': of its 50th Anniversary.
On a sadder note though. I would like to express my profound sorrow aid at the tragic murder on 18 April of Mr. kcho Ito, the Ma's or on A.a:n Government of Japan would like to take this opportunity to pay its deepest re--?;. _ tireless activities of Mayor Ito towards the total elimination of ruclear weap-n> will make further efforts to realize the common wishes cf tne Japanese r:-o peaceful and safe nuclear-weapon-free world.
(The importance of the NPT)
Mr. Chairman.
From the viewpoint of the only nation to have suffered atomic bombing-, a.-improve the security environment, Japan places immense importance on mairra.: strengthening the NPT, which is the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament n proliferation regime. Presently the NPT regime faces a plethora of serious, cm, but the NPT States Parties should rather take these challenges as a good oppc i concentrate their endeavors to further strengthen the NPT regime.
(The significance of the 1st Preparatory Committee)
This Preparatory Committee marks the beginning of a new review process in the 2005 NPT Review Conference, which failed to achieve any substantive o Through constructive discussions on the three pillars of the NPT - nuclear cisnn nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy - during this Preor must prove to the international community that the review process is fuifliiinc responsibilities of addressing the current challenges and thus maintain ccnf.dcn. NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
In this PrepCom, Japan will be taking up in particular the following items.
(Implementation of nuclear disarmament measures)
Advancing nuclear disarmament together with nuclear non-proliferation bolsters the fundamental bargain that underpins the NPT. and leads to the strengthen:-
NPT regime. Nuclear disarmament must be promoted persistemh wM,	r:, ....
the fullest possible extent the "Principles and Objectives" of 1995 an^e^'ico^ <
2000 including the 13 practical steps. The pressing issues in nuclear disa:......^
early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treatx	• - "
immediate commencement and early conclusion of negotiations on a f^h	Z7
off treaty (FMCT). The Six Presidents' proposal which is current , h,^ Conference on Disarmament (CD), is a realistic compromise that would enarse the CD to resume work in its primary role, including negotiations on an FMCT. .tar-ar broach urges the CD Member States to manifest the necessary flexibility tc adopt the Six-Presidents' proposal. Additionally, it is important that the nuclear-weapon implement deeper reductions in all types of nuclear weapons, mcl ucine C required of the United States and the Russian Federation in the Moscow urge all nuclear -weapon States to provide transparent accounts of disarmament efforts.
rates id those drid
rtaciear
(Regional nuclear issues)
The DPRK and Iranian nuclear issues represent serious chall £H2SS to leC .* te C s.een j . nuclear non-proliferation regime. The unanimous adoption of strong United Nations Security Council resolutions concerning these two cases demonstrates the intenational community's strong resolve. Japan welcomes such unified international. '.srortses ard calls upon all UN Member States to implement these relevant resolutions.
Japan once again condemns the nuclear test by the DPRK in October .^r \ car. The DPRK's nuclear test combined with its buildup of ballistic missile capsn'.i-je.-.. poses a significant threat to the peace and security not only of Japan but also in Fas: As.a and the entire international community, and thus a major challenge to the NPT regime I he DPRK's nuclear development cannot be possibly tolerated. We strong!;, urge the DPRK to fulfill its obligations under United Nations Security Council Resolution . 7 8 end to take concrete steps toward denuclearization. Japan will continue tc wor'w .awards a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the DPRK nuclear issue through; the Six Party f*iks.
In relation to Iran, Japan regrets that, despite repeated calls from me -ntcmaiionai community, Iran has not complied with the requirements of the UN Secant; Council resolutions, which include suspending all enrichment-related and reprocessing v;cti\ ities and work on "all heavy water-related projects. Japan strongly hopes for a negotiated peaceful solution to this issue. To this end, Japan will continue to take e\er> erpormn;t\ to urge Iran, based on the "suspension for suspension" proposal of the LlC- e to suspend its enrichment-related and reprocessing activities and then to return svm:i!> to the negotiation process.
For the purpose of achieving the universality of the NPT, Japan reiterates its calls for India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon Slates. In this connection, we would like to point out once again the importance of the 9l>5 Resolution on the Middle East.
(Strengthening the IAEA Safeguards)
Mr. Chairman,.
Implementation of the nuclear non-proliferation obligations set out in the NrT n V ensured through IAEA safeguards. For the IAEA to perform sufficient] v Its \ -II anc to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime, it is necessary to further ..p entire
the IAEA Additional Protocol. The number of States adheri na to the Add:tion:.' r"- •ircr>.) currently stands at 78, which is less than half the membership"of the NPT v\. cT . all countries that have yet to conclude an additional protocol to do so &-. tnc earnest possible time. Japan for its part has been working hard towards the tore c" additional protocols by those countries, in particular in Asia, and intends n uv.-.ruc these efforts.
(The peaceful uses of nuclear energy)
In recent years, expanding global energy demand and global warming ha? h!. .gh: .nx-ui
a reexamination of the role of nuclear energy, and internationally the promotion ;.f the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is gaining momentum.
Ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear safety and nuclear security is :nd:spcnsan;e prerequisite to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including nuclear powe- gcr-crat'en Ensuring these three areas, especially for the introduction of nuclear power g-.-nerruon. is a critical issue not only for the countries introducing nuclear power but Ar tne countries providing assistance, neighboring countries and by extension v, hole international community. The activities of the IAEA are crucial for deahny - this issue and Japan is committed to continuing its support for the LAEA.
Enhancing nuclear security, in particular ensuring the prevention of nuc.e?:r nnnenna: proliferation to non-state-actors such as terrorists, is a new issue that intemaror.a. society must tackle. In this regard, Japan has been making efforts to enhance n-joesr security through its contributions to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and in March v.r- -ear. approximately $125,000 U.S. dollars was additionally contributed ixinnssA, nnA Jt > Japan's intention to carry on such support.
(Nuclear Fuel Supply Assurances)
We are faced with the challenging task of advancing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while ensuring nuclear non-proliferation. Japan welcomes the various proposals put forward, including its own for an "IAEA Standby Arrangements System ro: the Assurance of Nuclear Fuel Supply" to this end. Japan will continue to pamc:pa« actively in the international discussions on this issue at the LAEA and other fora.
(Withdrawal) Mr. Chairman,
Withdrawal from the NPT is a problem that can have serious rarrdrcxions for international peace and security. Therefore, more in-depth deliberations -noJJ take place based on the valuable discussions that occurred at the 2005 \YT Re\iev> Conference.
(Disarmament and non-proliferation education)
Government officials and experts like ourselves are not the or.1% pen;: e mating disarmament and non-proliferation. It is important for the general public to mm c' :e the next generation its own strong aspirations for peace, experiences and v- s\a«.cr> :n linn-connection Japan has been emphasizing the importance of disarmament ami non-proliferation education. As a new endeavor by Japan, we will hold a De-oemm C up on disarmament and non-proliferation between Japanese students and students -mm aroand the world. We also intend to utilize "manga", a part of Japanese pop-culture, t spread information on disarmament and non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan has submitted to this Preparatory Committee a comprehensive wpaper, which covers the important points I have just raised, and a disarmamer >rc non-proliferation education working paper. Japan is committed to participating ac:.\ eN nt the deliberations of each cluster. We strongly desire that through frank discusses: :- among the NPT States Parties on strengthening the Treaty the process for the 205 C op " Review Conference will smoothly start.
Thank you for your attention.