
Allow me to begin by extending my congratulations to you on your election as President of this the Seventh Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and to assure you of my delegation's support. We are confident that in the light of your well-recorded experience, you will be able to lead the deliberations skillfully, and bring about a successful conclusion to our meeting.
At the outset, my delegation wishes to align itself with the statement made by the distinguished representative of Malaysia on behalf of the members of the Non-Aligned Movement who are parties to the Treaty; and with the Movement's working paper. We would also like to associate ourselves with the statement presented by the distinguished representative of Qatar on behalf of the Arab Group.
Mr. President,
It has never so much been the quantity or type of weapons that exist, nor their proliferation, vertical or horizontal, as such, which in the end punctures our hope for a safer future for this small planet and all its custodians; as much as it has been our recognition, implicit or otherwise, that we, the humans of today, have shown ourselves generally to be no wiser than our forefathers. Almost seventy years ago, a participant in the First World War, who later became a UN staff member, made reference in his writings to the "invincibility of man's stupidity". Perhaps this point, when placed in the context of a world awash in weaponry, with some states and non-state actors alike, coveting nuclear weapons and the technology to produce, or improve on, them, is what ultimately accounts for our most deep-seated fears.
The NPT and its associated regimes is of course, and has been for the last thirty-five years, a stab in the opposite direction: an attempt to prove to ourselves that common sense could still eclipse that most primordial need for ever greater assurances of security; that we could ultimately reduce all categories of nuclear weapons to the point of their elimination; that we could coexist with the science, spinning off its desirable and peaceful benefits, while resisting voluntarily the temptation to acquire the weaponry it supports. And yet, as we have all seen over the last decade, despite the near universality of the Treaty, it now, unfortunately, appears to be a very nervous stab. If we, as thinking human beings, are to prove that our stupidity is indeed not invincible; and that we will not, through some tragic miscalculation or other misfortune, invite the future annihilation of the human family or portions of it; then we must resolve our differences.
Moreover, if we are to deal adequately with the today's threat environment, the Treaty can still be our most effective instrument, potentially, so long as we show resolution and strengthen it in all areas where it is weak. We must, therefore, evaluate thoroughly the progress achieved in the implementation of the NPT over the last five years, as well as the outcomes of the past two
conferences, the comprehensive package of decisions and the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and, lastly, the Final Document of the 2000 Review conference.
Mr. President,
I will not repeat at length what many others here have said, particularly the distinguished representatives of Malaysia and Qatar, rather I will only underscore briefly the following points - which are important to my delegation.
The Treaty must be implemented strictly, with balanced and equal force applied in all three pillars.
To that end:
All 13 practical steps for the implementation of Article VI must be reaffirmed, if not strengthened. Progress must be made on establishing criteria for monitoring compliance under Article VI, and a calendar needs to be established to guide the effort. And, in particular, we feel the International Community must, without any further delay, ensure the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty. Negotiations must also begin, of course, expeditiously, and without pre-conditions or linkages, on a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty.
All states parties must also, finally, reconcile themselves to the legal findings contained in the ICJ advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons: principally, that their threatened use, or actual use of, "would generally be contrary to the principles and rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, and in particular the principles and rules of international humanitarian law."
The Treaty must be made universal, with all countries acceding to, and then complying with, the terms of the NPT. And here, we again join the international community in reiterating its demand that Israel, our neighbour and the only country in the Middle East not party to the Treaty, accede to the NPT and place itself under full-scope IAEA safeguards. We also hope that India and Pakistan would do the same. Obviously, all withdrawals from the Treaty remain a cause for concern.
We also reassert, once again, the importance of Article IV. In this connection, whatever may be said about the perceived security complications attributed to the nuclear fuel cycles, those concerns, whatever their merit, will be balanced, inevitably, against the overall lack of progress achieved in the implementation of Article VI.
We add our voice to those who believe the NPT regime must also be strengthened in the following manner:
The Conference on Disarmament should establish a subsidiary body as-soon as possible to draft a legally binding-instrument relating to the Negative Security Assurances.
The international community must also, as a matter of urgency, realize the establishment of a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone for the Middle East, a region that remains turbulent and unpredictable, and here again we support the establishment a subsidiary body to chart a course for that very purpose.
The IAEA should also be strengthened and supported, particularly where its safeguards work is concerned.
In conclusion, Mr. President, we align ourselves with all those who argue that, ultimately, only through the irreversible and verifiable elimination of all nuclear weapons, will we ever succeed in rendering a nuclear war unthinkable to future generations. Until that point, our collective future can, and will, never be considered secure.
Thank you Mr. President
