Mr. Chairman,
Let me join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your election as Chairman of the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference, and express my delegation's full confidence in your ability to lead this Session to its desired outcome. Let me also assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation to bring our deliberations to success.
As the delegation of Jordan associates itself with the statements of the Group of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of Arab countries, I shall be brief and straight to the point.
We are aware that much work is ahead of us in the coming three years, but that must not stop us from being optimistic about the prospects of success in the preparation for the 2010 Review Conference, surpassing the difficulties which engulfed preparation for the 2005 Conference and the well-registered disappointing outcome which followed.
However, in order to avoid repetition of the 2005 experience, we must first take some moments out to ask ourselves in all honesty: Are we ready to bring the 2010 Conference to success, i.e., do we have the political will firstly, and secondly, do we really want to save and reinvigorate the Treaty, and thereby achieve the goals for which it was created?
If, as we hope, the answer is 'yes', we are confident that the requirements for success of the preparatory process and the ensuing
Conference are all tenable and agreeable. Meanwhile, any disagreements are rather minor and detail-oriented, and should be solvable.
Mr. Chairman,
Disarmament, non-proliferation, and the right of states parties to acquire nuclear technology for peaceful purposes are the pillars on which the Treaty was built, and therefore must not be questioned or denied. They are not mutually exclusive but rather represent goals that can be achieved simultaneously and collectively. On the other hand, undermining any of these pillars could undermine the whole treaty, as we noticed in the 2005 Review Conference and its preparatory process.
Mr. Chairman,
Since we are discussing the pillars and principles of NPT, it must be noted that achieving the Treaty's goals will never be complete unless those principles are applied on every country even-handedly and without discrimination. This conception must apply not only to states parties, but to non-parties as well; and that can be achieved by means of urging the states that remain outside the Treaty to join in. It is not in anybody's interest that certain states adamantly evade NPT, which makes one wonder: Are we, the states parties, not doing enough?
Discussing the universality of the NPT inevitably leads us to the Middle East. About 12 years ago, the 1995 review conference adopted a resolution to create a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in the Middle East. The adoption of that resolution was fundamental for the accomplishment of the indefinite extension - rather than extinction - of NPT. While it is the most
relevant to this forum, the 1995 resolution is neither the first nor the last of international resolutions calling for a WMD-Free Middle East. It has rather been repeatedly reiterated by various resolutions and decisions, whether during the 2000 review conference or in different IAEA meetings, None of those resolutions was, in turn, created in a vacuum, but they all came as a continuation to a host of similar, binding international resolutions; and I would like to point here specifically to security council resolution 687 of 1991, and more specifically to its operative paragraph 14, which is still pending implementation. Nevertheless, Israel remains, hitherto, the only State in the Middle East not to have exceeded to NPT or opened its establishments to inspections.
The argument that "a country needs nuclear weapons because its survival is threatened" is the anti-thesis of NPT. We, the states parties, should not accept any attempts to market such pretexts for the sole purpose of deflecting the spotlights off Israel's defiance.
It is Jordan's firm belief that the establishment of comprehensive peace and security in the Middle East is in the interest and for the good of all countries in the region. Out of this conviction, we call upon Israel from this podium to accede to NPT and place its facilities under IAEA safeguards, so that the path is paved for the declaration of a WMD Free Middle East. Moreover, we call on Israel to take the extended Arab hand and embrace the Arab Peace initiative announced first in the 2000 Arab Summit and reiterated just last month by the Arab Foreign Ministers. All in the aim of installing permanent peace and security, in place of suspicion, distrust and the constant threat of war.
Mr. Chairman,
Jordan has recently announced the establishment of a peaceful nuclear program to produce energy. The Director General of IAEA Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, ^t^mont^Concluded a visit to Jordan, where he reviewed the details and plans pertaining to the program. To Jordan, this program represents a national need, given the scarcity of energy resources in the country, and the high prices of oil in international markets.
We look forward to cooperation and support from our friends, states parties for our program in accordance with article IV, which confirms "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production, and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes", and article V, under which "all the parties to the Treaty undertake to facilitate... the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials, and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy," and to "cooperate in contributing... to the further development of applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes... with due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world."
Mr. Chairman,
I sincerely wish for this first session of the preparatory committee, under your wise leadership, to lay the grounds for a successful Review Conference in 2010, for the benefit of all.
I thank you.