Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, let me extend my congratulations to you on your election as Chairman of the third Preparatory Committee session for the 2005 Review Conference of the State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Mr. Chairman,
The third Preparatory Committee session is taking place at a time when the strength of the NPT continues to be seriously tested. The desire on the part of a number of countries, as well as terrorist organizations, to acquire nuclear weapons and other types of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) creates a grave threat to global security.
For this reason, the NPT continues to be a key instrument in halting both vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons and a point of departure for nuclear disarmament.
Acting on the basis of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference, the Preparatory Committee should provide the 2005 Review Conference with specific recommendations regarding joint efforts to ensure effective application of the NPT
WMD non-proliferation and disarmament are mutually complementary processes. In this context, the NPT is the only multilateral arms control arrangement obligating the State Parties to adopt nuclear disarmament measures.
Kazakhstan continues to believe that it is essential to ensure a fair balance between mutual obligations of both nuclear and non-nuclear-weapons states in order to achieve complete elimination of nuclear weapons. We are convinced that in order to achieve that goal it is necessary to take steps to conclude a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear-weapons states.
The disarmament process should be carried out within the framework of legally binding arrangements. In this regard, Kazakhstan believes that it is necessary to launch negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty and to establish by the Conference on Disarmament an Ad Hoc Committee on nuclear disarmament to negotiate a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
Kazakhstan continues to feel strongly that the Treaty should become universal and urges all states, without any exception, which have not yet acceded to it, to do it immediately We should not accept a situation when the international community lacks meaningful tools to influence states that violate non-proliferation regimes.
Mr. Chairman,
Supporting the universal nature of the Treaty, Kazakhstan is firmly committed to the implementation of the 13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament agreed by the 2000 Review Conference.
Still coping with grave effects of nuclear testing conducted in its territory, Kazakhstan reaffirms its principled position regarding a total ban of all nuclear testing. We believe that it is necessary to speed up ratification and entry into force of a Comprehensive Nuclear-Tsst-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
As for Kazakhstan, it is making practical contribution to the strengthening of the CTBT verification regime. Seismic control stations, located in our country, are now an integral part of the International Monitoring System.
We welcome efforts to establish nuclear-weapons-free zones in all the regions of the world, viewing them as an effective contribution to nuclear non-proliferation. At the same time, Kazakhstan is actively involved in the negotiations on a treaty establishing a nuclear-weapons-free zone in Central Asia. The initiative by the Central Asian states to establish such a zone in the region should become an important contribution by these states to declared objectives
Kazakhstan attaches great importance to the full implementation of the IAEA safeguards and to the strengthening of its capacity. The Agency's verification mechanism provides a guarantee against non-diversion of nuclear material from a declared peaceful use to military purposes and illicit nuclear activity. To strengthen these safeguards, all states should sign an Additional Protocol with IAEA.
As for Kazakhstan, it signed the Additional Protocol to the Agreement between the Republic of Kazakhstan and the IAEA for the Application of Safeguards in Connection with the NPT. As a result of active cooperation between Kazakhstan and the Agency, all our nuclear facilities are now under IAEA safeguards. An effective safeguards systems act> as a confidence-building measure and an early warning mechanism.
Besides, since 2000, Kazakhstan is a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, a fact which is yet another reaffirmation of its firm commitment to carrying out its nuclear activity in compliance with internationally accepted rules and standards.
Mr. Chairman,
The achievements in the exploration of outer space should only serve peaceful purposes of humankind. It is vitally important to prevent militarization of outer space, which could have irreversible consequences. Negotiations on the issue of prevention of an arms race in outer space should start as soon as possible.
In line with its consistent policy in the area of non-proliferation, Kazakhstan applied, in 2000, for membership in the Missile Control Technology Regime (MTCR) and submitted all the required documentation. Our country is taking steps to reinforce and improve, on a continuous basis, its national export control system. Kazakhstan has scientific and technological capacity in the area of missile and space systems, is the site of Baikonur, of one of the world's largest launching pads, and participates in international space programmes. It is all the more deplorable that our country's request for its admission to the MTCR has not yet been granted.

Mr. Chairman.
In fact, security cannot be ensured if do not maintain, reinforce and universalize WMD non-proliferation regimes. In this new century, adequate political vision has to be displayed in order to address emerging threats. International agreements have to be improved so that they could be adapted to new realities. In this context, Canada's proposal to institutionalize the NPT deserves careful consideration. Effective measures have to be taken to universalize, develop and strengthen the NPT verification mechanisms.
Global partnership in combating proliferation of all types of WMD and their means of delivery constitutes a positive contribution to international non-proliferation efforts. In this context, we support the initiative of the Security Council regarding the adoption of a resolution on WMD non-proliferation. In view of current threats to global security, all states should take measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring WMD or their components.
Weakened international control is the main reason for the existence of a threat of non-state actors getting hold of WMD. There is only one solution - to tighten controls and to increase transparency in the area of non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
Kazakhstan expresses hope that the current session of the Preparatory Committee will be able to formulate meaningful recommendations for the 2005 Review Conference on the whole range of issues under consideration. Together with other delegations, we intend to work hard to achieve the goals that we all have set for ourselves.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.