

Mr. President,
Allow me to associate myself with the congratulations that have been conveyed to you and to express confidence that under Your presidency the Conference will successfully achieve its goals. 

Mr. President,
This conference is tasked to review the course of implementation of the decisions approved five years ago, and to determine steps necessary to go ahead. We have gathered here in order to evaluate the efficiency of the new review process, prospects for securing solid and, most importantly, confidence evoking regime of nuclear threat reduction and nuclear proliferation prevention.
Unfortunately, the preparatory meetings within the framework of review process were held at the time when nuclear weapons possession again has become a key factor in the world policies. Unsteadiness of the nuclear-missile nonproliferation regime has manifested itself in nuclear tests in South Asia, elevated role of nuclear deterrence as well as strategic arms reduction process deceleration. Taken into consideration the abovementioned we have to undertake a lot in order to elaborate measures for strengthening nuclear non-proliferation regime and meet all commitments under the NPT.
The problems revealed during the review process, could lead to inconsistencies between interpretation of treaty obligations and interests of its parties, especially between nuclear weapons states and others. It's our goal to make the Treaty an effective tool for nuclear disarmament problems solution and strengthening of the non-proliferation regime.
I would like to emphasize that the Republic of Kazakhstan attaches greatest importance to the Treaty review process which is a key element of international efforts to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons. We assume that the Treaty is the only multilateral agreement in the field of the nuclear anus control binding all states to promote nuclear disarmament measures. The issues of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation have an interdependent nature, which stipulates the necessity of nuclear, and non-nuclear states joint efforts aimed at enhancing international security.
All of us know, that nuclear proliferation over the long period of time has been the major threat to the very existence of human civilization. The progress made in preventing WIND and means of its delivery proliferation has become possible thanks to common comprehension of danger posed by nuclear weapons and voluntary desire of countries to solve problems by political dialogue and search of mutually acceptable solutions. Due to this, it was possible to establish the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, which set legal basis and became a unique tool for preventing further proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The world, which over four decades was dominated by the cult of nuclear weapons, can not immediately get rid of nuclear arsenals. But it is very important now that the US and Russia's negotiating process on the reduction of armaments should be intensified and joined by three other nuclear states. In our view, there has been created a good backlog for five nuclear states to start negotiating nuclear disarmament issues, thus implementing obligations under the NET.
The positive signal for the world community was the recent ratification by the State Duma of the Russian Federation of the START II, which paves way to negotiations on further reductions of strategic arms, as well as a package of 1997ABM arrangements, in particular, the Memorandum of understanding on participation of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine in the implementation of the ABM Treaty, signed in September, 1997 in New York.
At the same time, it became clear that despite the multilateral treaties in force, the international arms control regime is very vulnerable, since even a slightest change in the global balance and stability could endanger the efficiency of the international arms control regime as a whole.
In this regard we are concerned with the situation with ABM Treaty, which during last decades ensured relative balance and stability in the world and played a decisive role in curbing the nuclear arms race. Therefore, the preservation of the Treaty is an indispensable condition in the process of disarmament and achievement of nuclear weapons free world. In spite of the fact that the Treaty is a bilateral agreement, its important role in enhancing global stability, advancing disarmament and international security is recognized by all. Taking into account that there is an extremely critical problem of proliferation of missile and missile technologies we need to undertake urgent delay measures in this area.
Recognizing the need for overall strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, we stand for the entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) at an early date. I would like to emphasize, that Kazakhstan by closing Semipalatinsk test site has made a significant contribution to the process of nuclear tests ban Moreover, today former Semipalatinsk test site is used for the calibration of the seismic stations equipment linked with CTBT global nuclear-weapon tests monitoring network.
In this regard Kazakhstan applauds to the ratification of the CTB E by the State Duma of Russian Federation and we are encouraged by the US administration efforts aimed at resuming the issue of CTBT ratification by the US Senate. In our view, the readiness to ratify the CTBT by the key parties directly depends on the positions of nuclear states.
Recognizing that globalization of international relations which opens broad possibilities for development of the world market, bears a potential threat of proliferation of nuclear missile arms and technologies, we stand for strengthening struggle with illegal turnover of nuclear materials and missile technologies. Since 1997 Kazakhstan has been following Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) guidelines in its practice in the field of nuclear export. Now we are nearly through internal preparatory procedures to join the NSG.
Kazakhstan is also interested in joining the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). Possessing technological potential in the field of missile manufacturing and a unique launch site, our country can make significant contribution to this Regime and actively cooperate in the field of peaceful use of missile technologies.
At present Kazakhstan enforces the system of export control and upgrades the legal basis in order to conform to NSG and MTCR requirements. We consider our steps as a contribution to strengthening of non-proliferation regime and assume that strict export control is the serious obstacle for nuclear weapons manufacturing. At the same time the efficiency of the non-proliferation regime depends on the high level political commitments of the governments in the area of international security aimed at, inter alia, exchange of available information on nuclear activities. A new climate of openness and transparency in nuclear field is required. The openness would be helpful in terms of enhancing confidence between states and ensuring that this material would not be misused.
As a full member of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva (CD) we stand for the earliest commencement of negotiations on the agenda of this forum, in particular of negotiations on missile materials military production cut off, which would have great importance in terms of the NPT realization.
In this regard, we support proposals of the President of Conference on Disarmament to establish special working groups on the following items of the agenda of Conference: 'Arms race prevention and nuclear disarmament', 'Fissile materials production cut off', and 'Prevention of arms race in the outer space.' 
The NPT provides a pattern for the solution of regional non-proliferation problems. Regional nuclear weapons free zones attract attention as means of expressing and encouraging common values in the field of nuclear disarmament and arms control. Such zones promote narrowing of a geographical area for military nuclear activity and thus strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The importance of such zones for strengthening global and regional peace and security was confirmed by documents of the 1995 NPT Review Conference. Kazakhstan takes active part in elaboration of the Treaty on establishment of a nuclear weapons free zone in Central Asia. The work on the preparation of the Treaty carried out during almost three years shows that the Central Asian states seriously and responsibly consider this issue. We hope that in the near future the text of the Treaty would be agreed upon and eventually become a substantial contribution of the Central Asian countries to strengthening the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime.
The problem of security assurances to non-nuclear states continues to be in the center of discussions. Kazakhstan believes that as a solution of the problem of security assurances could be adoption of the security assurances Protocol as an integral part of the NPT. The formulation of the obligations concerning non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear NPT parties should be simple and unambiguous.
Moreover, we should keep in mind that the NPT is the legal basis for development of peaceful use of nuclear energy, which is very important for our country. Achieving openness and unrestricted exchange of nuclear materials and technologies as well as scientific information should in the end serve development of programs on peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr. President,
The priority of issues related to the necessity of nuclear disarmament is confirmed by annual resolutions of the UN General Assembly. At the same time, if real actions are not undertaken in this area the achievement of these goals is impossible.
In this regard, we believe that it is extremely important to continue disarmament process which mainly depends on political will and desire of all countries to search for constructive and mutually acceptable solutions, first of all, related to the entry into force of the CTBT and elaboration of the FMCT.
Finally I would like to attract your attention to the problems regarding the rehabilitation of the Semipalatinsk former nuclear test ground. Nearly two years have passed since the adoption of the UN General Assembly resolution urging the world society to assist the Government of Kazakhstan in renewal of this region's life activity.
At present, report which will be presented for consideration of the 55th session of the LIT GA has been nearly completed. Availing of this opportunity, I would like to express the words of gratitude to all states and international agencies for their contribution to the implementation of this resolution. Our special appreciation is expressed to the Government of Japan for the considerable support in the solution of the vital objectives of the Semipalatinsk region rehabilitation.

Thank you, Mr. President. 
  

