Statement
by the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the general debate of the First session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2017 Review Conference
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, May 3, 2017
Mr. Chair,
1. First of all, I would like to congratulate you, OR hesalf of the delegation
of the Republic of Kcazakhstafr, on your role as the Chair of the First Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. Let me assure you
of our support and cooperation in the full implementation of your mandate.
2. It is difficult to overestimate the importance of the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. The NPT, as one of the cornerstones of
international peace and security, plays a crucial role in advancing nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
It is crucial that the current PrepCom consolidates our collective efforts in the
universalization of the NPT, elaborate an effective mechanism against the withdrawal of
states from the Treaty and ensures unconditional implementation of all multilaterally
negotiated and generally approved agreements, including the Final document of the
2010 Review Conference.
We have to admit that more effort and commitment is required from us in order
to avoid any possible failure with respect to common obligations. In this context, this
review process presents a unique opportunity to exchange views on a wide range of
pressing issues and take concerted actions aimed at the full implementation and
strengthening of the NPT.
3. The nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are I considered by
Kazakhstan as the highest priority demanding immediate attention. These two
issues are, interdependent and mutually reinforcing. That is why we need to
advance them concurrently through collective efforts and in the spirit of
multilateralism.
On a global scale, nuclear disarmament still remains an aspiration rather
than action as thousands of nuclear arsenals still remain. Kazakhstan calls upon
nuclear powers that pledged to make sincere efforts to eliminate nuclear weapons,
in accordance with Article VI of the NPT, to take practical measures in this regard.
4. Kazakhstan for decades has been playing an outstanding role in the global
process of nuclear disarmament and maintaining the non-proliferation regime. 
- 2 -
Strengthening of nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime and nuclear
security will be among the main directions of Kazakhstan's work as a nonpermanent
member of the UN Security Council for the period of 2017 -2018_
4_ Kazakhstan believes that a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing
observed by the nuclear powers, though an important factor of nuclear security,
cannot serve as an alternative to a legally-binding document such as the CTBT
And an early entry into force of this Treaty would be essential for effective
implementation of the NPT
As co-coordinators of the Article 14 process, Kazakhstan and Japan have been
conducting consistent work to facilitate the speedy entry into force of the CTBT
Kazakhstan and Japan adopted a high-level joint statement in October 2015, and issued
two other statements in 2016 at the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington and the
Open-ended Working Group in Geneva_ It is the first statement of the highest level ever
made by the CTBT Article 14 Co-Coordinators_
Our hope is to encourage once again certain states, whose ratification is
necessary for the entry into force of CTBT, to sign and ratifY the Treaty as soon as
possible_
5_ The establishment of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZ) is a step
towards a safer world_ It should be acknowledged more widely as one of the
practical ways to achieve this objective_ These kind of initiatives should be
encouraged by providing unconditional assurances against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons_
Although NWFZs now cover more than half of the world, most of the NSA
protocols are still under negotiations or have not been ratified yet by some nuclear
weapon'::'~Qlilfs (NWS), including the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in
Central Asia_ The Semipalatinsk Treaty is considered by Kazakhstan as an
opportunity to foster peace and security in a very fragile region full of conflict
potential and challenges as well as an opportunity for a more stable and secure
future_
Among our current challenges remains convening the Conference on the
estab lishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction, as stipulated by the 2010 Action Plan_ The weight of this
Conference is dictated by its pivotal role in ensuring both regional and global
security_
Yet we should keep in mind that the establishment of zones free from deadly
weapons is not an end in itself and, given their geographical limitation, such
assurances cannot be a substitute for universal and legally-binding agreements_ It
is an additional tool to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons in the current
international climate_
6_ It would be appropriate for us to develop during the current review cycle
our responses to new challenges faced by the NPT in the field of peaceful use of 
- 3 -
nuclear energy. Increased attention should be paid to the possible emergence of
new nuclear energy producing countries and growing nuclear energy consumption
and the need to ensure an adequate level of nuclear safety. The development of .
nuclear energy must exclude any risk of proliferation of nuclear materials usage
for military purposes.
,- From the first day when Kazakhstan renounced its nuclear status in 1991, we
have ensured not to produce or acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices and accepted IAEA safeguards on all its nuclear materials and facilities.
We always remain faithful to this commitmenhl
Given the contemporary "nuclear renaissance", Kazakhstan, as the world's
biggest supplier of uranium products, stands ready to add to our common cause.
i Kazakhstan supported the h~\ initiative to establish the Low enriched uranium
Bank (LEU Bank). After commissioning a new building for LEU Bank, which is
expected in August this year, the bank will be launched.
7. Concluding my remarks, Mr. Chair, I stress our conviction that a nuclear free
world can be achieved if there is enough political will from all states. Kazakhstan, on
our part, stands ready to add to strengthening the NPT, which provides firm basis for
total elimination of nuclear arsenals and prevention of the spread ofWMD.
Finally I would like to announce the publication of the book called
"Reflections on the Treaty on the non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" Review
conferences and the future of the NPT by Jayantha Dhanapala and Tariq Raufwith
the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan. We appreciate the
Secretariat for their kind distribution of the book to the delegations at their desks.
Thank you. 
