Mr. Chairman,
I would like to join previous speakers in congratulating you on election as Chairman of the Third session of this Committee. Kazakhstan looks, forward to working closely and constructively with the delegates in finalizing, under your able guidance, procedural arrangements and substantive recommendations to the 2010 Review Conference and ensuring its successful conclusion.
We believe that only multilateral mechanisms, including, first and foremost, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, can address and tackle the gravest challenges of the world caused by the threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Kazakhstan, strongly committed to the global processes of disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons from the veiy first days of its independence, considers the NPT as the main instrument of nuclear non-proliferation regime, based on three mutually reinforced pillars.
Renunciation of nuclear weapons, closure of the nuclear test site and our country's adherence to fulfill international obligations are an important reaffirmation of our will and desire to strengthen global cooperation in the field of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. Our country has joined almost all international instruments aimed at eliminating weapons of mass destruction. Kazakhstan joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation, and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. In 2008 Kazakhstan ratified the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
We call for the earliest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and strengthening of its verification mechanism. Kazakhstan made available the territory of the former Semipalatinsk nuclear test site for the 2008 Integrated Field Exercise of on-site inspections as its contribution to this process.
Kazakhstan recognizes the special role of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The country's entire nuclear activity is being earned out in accordance with its standards and under its control. We call upon all States Parties that have not yet done so, to meet all the conditions for transparency in accordance with agreements with the IAEA, including the Additional Protocol.
Kazakhstan stands for establishment of internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones as an important instrument of ensuring the integrity and sustainability of the international non-proliferation regime and contribution
to the strengthening of peace and security in different regions and the entire world. The entry into force of the Treaty on Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in Central Asia on 21 March 2009 was wholeheartedly welcomed by the United Nations Secretary-General who called on all concerned states to address any outstanding issues in order to ensure the Treaty's effective implementation. In this context, the five Central Asian States are submitting a relevant working paper of the 2009 Prepcom in accordance with Article VII of the NPT,
Mr. Chairman,
Despite the last years' stagnation in the nuclear disarmament process and the unproductive outcome of the 2005 Review Conference .due .to the absence of consensus and political will, recent developments, including • statements of nuclear weapon states in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation provide us with hope and encouragement for progress in our current work.
Kazakhstan welcomes the Russian and United States leaders' pledges to cut their countries' nuclear arsenals as well as statements by U.S. President indicating that the United States would seek a world without nuclear weapons and to pursue the ratification of the CTBT.
As Kazakhstan has repeatedly pointed out, our challenge today is to ensure the effectiveness and universality of the Treaty. We have to acknowledge that NPT, which, while remains a basis for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament mechanism, failed to prevent spreading of the nuclear weapons and appearing of the new de-facto nuclear countries. In part, it is related to the lack of progress in implementing obligations in reduction of existing nuclear arsenals towards total elimination of this type of WMD.
Non-proliferation and disarmament are mutually complementary processes. Kazakhstan stands for steady and gradual nuclear disarmament through the implementation of commitments by all NPT Member States - both nuclear and non-nuclear.
Our delegation stands for strengthening of the IAEA verification regimes and calls on states that have not yet done so, to conclude agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency on safeguards and additional protocols.
We support the necessity to elaborate a new, legally-binding treaty on reduction of nuclear arsenals of nuclear weapons states; the earliest completion of negotiations on a non-discriminatory, universally applicable fissile material cut-off treaty; and drafting an international agreement on the prevention of an arms race in outer space.
Recognizing the right of any nation to develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes under strict international control, Kazakhstan stands for peaceful resolution of the conflict situations that have arisen recently concerning nuclear programmes through diplomatic efforts and negotiations.
We call on states, which possess enrichment technologies, to work towards the internationalization of services of nuclear technology centers under the auspices of the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
In our aspirations to consolidate efforts of the States Parties for the progress in the NPT Review Conference in 2010, we are ready to put forward some preliminary ideas and recommendations during the thematic discussions of this session to ensure the effectiveness of this important component of the international security system.
Only by joining efforts, will we be able to make our world safer and better. We express our hope that the exercise of flexibility among delegations of the States Parties to the NPT would allow the Committee to accommodate concerns of all the parties, break out of its current impasse and formulate recommendations to the Review Conference on the whole range of issues under consideration.
Thank you for your attention.