
-,
Distinguished Madame President,
Distinguis~ed delegates of the Conference,
First of all, I would like to convey my deepest condolences to the Government and people of Nepal
for the most tragic earthquake that has taken such a high toll of human loss and suffering and express
sentiments for a speedy recovery and rehabilitation.
At the outset, let me extend our congratulations to you, Madame President, on your election to the
Presidency of the 2015 Review Conference of the State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).We stand ready to support you in overcoming all barriers to progress in this review
proc~ss.
Madame President,
Kazakhstan believes that the NPT must remain to be one of the pillars of global security, that still
needs to be reinforced and protected.
We realize that there is a long way to go to fulfill its ambitions especially in its first pillar and
therefore it is vitally important that we make tangible progress in the reduction of nuclear weapons with
ultimate goal of their total elimination.
Four states - Belarus, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, and South Africa -lead by example and have already
voluntarily renounced their nuclear arsenals. It is exactly 20 years ago that the last nuclear warhead was
removed from the territory of Kazakhstan, which at that time possessed the fourth largest nuclear arsenal in
the world. This demonstrates that with a strong political will and determination nuclear weapon states can
fulfill their obligations under the NPT.
We are concerned by a large number of remaining nuclear weapons, as well as by the continued
central role in security concepts of nuclear weapon states. Kazakhstan therefore proposes that the
international community adopts a Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear Weapons Free
World, as the first step towards the Convention on Nuclear Weapons.
We are convinced that non-nuclear weapon states have the legitimate right to receive legal security
assurances from nuclear weapon states not to use and not to threaten to use nuclear weapons against them.
In the face of the deteriorating international situation and break down in trust, it is critical that we
reaffirm the basic principles of international law such as peaceful settlement of disputes, refrain from the
use of or threat to use force, territorial integrity, and inviolability of frontiers.
We call for the universalization of the NPT so it is truly effective and strengthened. We believe that
formulation of clear mechanisms to discourage withdrawal from the Treaty are essential and we have to
consider this issue very carefully on the basis of different proposals and find compromise solution.
The recommendations of the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT Review Conference to close the gap
between reality and our ambitions must be prominent in our discussions this week.
KAZAKHSTAN FOR THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL 2017-2018 
Madame President,
As a country that closed down the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site back in 1991 and as Co-President
of the Article XIV Conference on Facilitating the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test
Ban Treaty (CTB'/) we calIon all states which have yet to sign or ratify the Treaty to do so without any
preconditions and delays.
We strongly believe that a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing is not an effective alternative to a
legally binding Treaty.
For the Treaty to be an effective mechanism for non-proliferation, we believe all States must show
the political will and provide the necessary resources to complete the verification regime under CTBT and
maximize the capabilities of the Provisional Technical Secretariat.
For the goals of CTBT serves UN GA Resolution on 29 August as a International Day against
nuclear tests, initiated by Kazakhstan and we call upon all states to take measures to observe this Day.
We express our deep concern over the nuclear tests conducted by the DPRK and its nuclear
programme. We urge the DPRK to fully comply with its obligations under the Security Council resolutions
and return to the negotiating process in the six-party format.
We recognize the significance of the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMC'/) and actively engage in
the work of the Group of Government Experts. This Treaty, together with the CTBT, would undoubtedly
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and we should exert strong political will to make these Treaties
reality.
Strict implementation of the requirements of UN Security Council's 1540 Resolution is of special
importance. Kazakhstan together with UNODA and the 1540 Committee hosted two workshops on the
Resolution's regional implementation.
My country suffered first hand from the devastation of nuclear tests. The humanitarian imperative
and will of the Kazakhstan people were the main driving forces behind the historic decision by the President
of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev to abolish nuclear weapons and dismantle related infrastructure on our
territory. We encourage further deliberations on the issue of humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons
to give a new powerful impetus to our common efforts to achieve a total ban on nuclear testing and to get
rid of these deadly weapons
Nuclear-Weapon-Free zones playa major role in strengthening non-proliferation and global security.
That was the main reason for the countries of Central Asia to establish a regional nuclear weapon free zone.
We welcome the signature by the five nuclear powers of the Protocol to the Treaty on a NuclearWeapon-Free
Zone in Central Asia (the Semipalatinsk Treaty) in May last year and subsequent ratifications
by France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Russian Federation. We urge the
remaining signatories to complete their ratification processes as soon as possible.
We note with regret the failure to implement the decision of 2010 NPT Review Conference on
convening a Conference on the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. We urge all parties concerned to demonstrate strong political will and
to organize the conference as soon as possible. We strongly believe that establishment of the zone would be
good basis for dialogue and facilitate peace, cooperation and mutual trust at the Middle East.
The Republic of Kazakhstan supports the universal implementation of the IAEA Safeguards
Agreements and its Additional Protocol, and calls upon all other states to sign them.
As all States Parties to the NPT have an inalienable right to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, Kazakhstan also plans to develop civil nuclear energy programme.
We highly evaluate our work with the IAEA and are enhancing our cooperation with the Agency
through voluntary contributions to its Nuclear Security Fund and the Peaceful Uses Initiative.
It is important that states developing civil nuclear programs have indiscriminate access to a nuclear
fuel sources in a predictable and sustainable manner.
To this end Kazakhstan is committed to hosting the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank and we
intend to conclude respective Host Country Agreement this year.
KAZAKHSTAN FOR THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL 2017-2018 
The Bank will not limit in any way the inalienable right of each country to develop its own nuclear
technology, including full nuclear cycle.
We welcome the progress made in agreeing a political framework agreement between the Islamic
Republic of Iran (IRI) and the six international mediators to resolve the Iranian nuclear programme.
Kazakhstan made a practical contribution to the negotiation process by providing a platform for
holding two rounds of talks in 2013 and we hope that the political will of the participating countries will be
maintained and comprehensive agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme will be signed within the
agreed timeframe.
Madam Chair,
As President Nursultan Nazarbayev has said: "Kazakhstan has set an example of high responsibility
to present and future generations of mankind.
We have convincingly demonstrated, by our own behavior, that genuine security rests not on nuclear
arsenals, but on peaceful foreign policy, internal stability and sustainable economic and political
development of the country."
In the immediate run-up to this Conference, the Kazakhstani NOO ATOM Project together with
their Norwegian partners brought for this high assembly the message of peace from millions of ordinary
people around the globe who aspire to live in nuclear weapon free world.
The Republic of Kazakhstan, by giving up its nuclear status and closing the Semipalatinsk testing
site, has shown itself as a consistent supporter of the global process of non-proliferation and disarmament
and the multilateral approach to resolving global security issues.
I can promise that these goals will be high on our agenda if we gain a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council for 2017-2018. '
Kazakhstan will continue to be a leader in nuclear responsibility.
Thank you for your attention. .
KAZAKHSTAN FOR THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL 2017-2018 