On behalf of the delegation of Kenya, I wish to congratulate you and members of the bureau for your election to preside over this important Review Conference. I am confident that your diplomatic and negotiating skills will lead us to a successful conclusion of the conference.
My delegation associates itself with the statements made by both the African Group and the Non-Aligned Movement. You can count on my delegation's full cooperation.
Mr. President,
Nuclear weapons continue to pose the greatest threat to mankind at present, just as it did sixty years ago. An estimated 23,000 nuclear weapons still exist in the world today. The prospect of nuclear weapons falling into unauthorized hands is real and very frightening indeed.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) remains the centerpiece of global nuclear disarmament and non proliferation. Kenya reaffirms its strong commitment to the Treaty's basic principle objectives and calls upon states parties to endeavour to strengthen them while refraining from any acts which may undermine the effective implementation of the Treaty.
Total nuclear disarmament must remain our ultimate goal. Considering the new and emerging threats, especially those posed by terrorists, it is of vital importance that we intensify and hasten the pace of negotiations on the disarmament agenda. In this regard, we urge the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the sole negotiating forum for disarmament treaties, to embark on substantive work as a matter of urgency.
Mr, President,
Kenya believes that rather than decrying the disappointing outcome of the 2005 Revcon, we should build on the 2000 agreements and move even further in order to accomplish the goal of total elimination of nuclear weapons. In this context, my delegation underscores the merits of the 13 practical steps agreed upon in 2000 on the systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the NPT.
Furthermore, it is our conviction that there is need to commence early negotiations leading to the conclusion of an international convention for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons.
We must also seize the window of opportunity presented by the current positive atmosphere in global nuclear disarmament. President Obama's Nuclear Summit
last month was a significant watershed in this regard, which should be followed up with concrete multilateral disarmament steps. It is imperative that we work towards the attainment of universal adherence to the NPT. We, therefore, invite those states that are not party to the treaty, and especially those with nuclear capabilities or possessing nuclear weapons to join the Treaty.
Similarly, it is important that the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) enters into force as soon as possible. We urge all states that have not ratified, particularly those whose ratification is mandatory, to bring it into force as a matter of priority.
Mr. President,
The NPT regime has served us well for forty years. In order to strengthen it we must maintain the delicate balance between its three pillars namely nuclear disarmament, non- proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
It must not be forgotten that in giving up our sovereign right to receive, produce or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons we, the non-nuclear weapon states, have always understood that there will be a corresponding commitment from Nuclear Weapons States to disarm. This was the grand bargain in the NPT. It is, therefore, a matter of concern to Non-Nuclear Weapons States that disarmament appears to take the back seat.
Kenya recognizes that bilateral and regional disarmament negotiations can play a positive role and can contribute significantly towards the elaboration of disarmament agreements. To this end, we commend the bilateral agreement between the USA and the Russian Federation that was signed on 8th April, 2010 in Prague. We applaud President Obama's commitment to ensure that the USA takes concrete steps towards a nuclear weapons free world.
The signing of the new START Treaty is a major step in the right direction and we look forward to its early ratification and entry into force. We call on other nuclear weapons states to move expeditiously in this direction, with a view to concluding strategic negotiations and enhancing nuclear safety and security.
Mr. President,
We recognize the pivotal role played by the IAEA, especially on verification. The IAEA should be strengthened and encouraged to carry out its mandate in ensuring that professional and independent verification exercises are undertaken. The Agency must be provided with adequate financial and technical resources to be able to accomplish its mandate.
Nuclear-Weapon Free Zones (NWFZ) have a significant role to play in the promotion of nuclear non-proliferation. The Treaty of Pelindaba is a strong indicator of Africa's commitment to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We encourage those regions that have not established Nuclear Weapons Free Zones to give the matter the serious attention it deserves. Kenya supports especially the establishment of a nuclear free zone in the Middle East. We call on all the parties concerned to engage in discussions towards that end.
Mr. President,
Kenya believes that peaceful uses of nuclear technology can be of tremendous benefit especially for developing countries. In this context, it is important that we recognize States Parties' inalienable right to determine their energy needs and arrangements to meet those needs. The IAEA can be an important partner in ensuring a non-discriminatory approach to nuclear fuel supply and that an atmosphere of trust and cooperation exists between suppliers and consumers.
Faced with extremely high costs of petrol and the need to address issues of climate change, it is only fair that developing countries are assisted in their quest to access nuclear energy for development purposes and in strict conformity with safety and security requirements of the IAEA.
To Conclude, Mr. President,
This Conference gives us an excellent opportunity to take stock of the progress made in the implementation of the major decisions made in 1995 and 2000 Review conferences. The extent to which states have laboured to promote and implement the provisions of the NPT will determine the outcome of the Conference. The goal of a nuclear weapons free world is very feasible if we work together and take bold political decisions at this Conference. We owe it to our children and all the future generations, to leave them a safer world free of the threat of nuclear annihilation.
I thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



