KENYA " 3
/
Sbatemerrt by
Hm%. Anthorny AndaPlg"e
Ambarsador/Deputy permanent Representative
sf: the Rep~bfiic sf Kenys
At the
Second Session of the Preparatoy Committee $0 the NPT
Annual MeeMng 0% State Parties
(Geneva, 22nd April, - 3rd May, 2813)
Geneva, 23rd April, 2013
PERMANENT MlSSloN OF KENYA
1-3, AVENUE L)E LA PAIX- 1202 GENEVA-028 SOSAO 60 
Mr. Chairman,
I congratulate you on assumption of your duties as Chair of this Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the State Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I assure you of my
delegations support.
Kenya aligns itself with the Statement delivered by the distinguished representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome and give our full support to the Joint Statement by South Africa on the
humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons on behalf of 51 Stale Parties
to the NPT. I will touch on this issue a little later.
Mr. Chairman,
Kenya believes this PrepCom provides us with the opportunity to review commitments,
assess progress in the implementation of the NPT Action Plan and decide on the next
steps we must take ahead of the 2010 Review Conference. We attach great importance
to NPT review meetings.
However, we are convinced that if State Parties could honour their responsibilities and
obligations, it is only then that we could attain our collective objective of a world free of
nuclear weapons.
Unfortunately, this has not been the case. The confidence some have expressed is at
variance with reality. The implementation of the Action Plan's three pillars: nuclear
disarmament; nuclear non-proliferation; and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy has
yielded very few tangible results.
As regards the first pillar, multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament (CD) remains deadlocked. It is a source of frustration and
great disappointment. Our efforts to advance the elimination of nuclear weapons seem
too distant. Based on passed experience, Kenya does not share the optimism and
expectations expressed regarding the high-level event on nuclear disarmament to be
held in September, in New York.
We believe a lot: more commitment to nuclear disarmament is required rather than
statements of political support. The stalemate in the CD can be addressed if we are
prepared to look at its external environment, key policy priorities, perceived conflicting
interests of States and domestic political considerations.
The situation is further compounded by legitimization of nuclear weapons, their
incorporation in national defence strategies and in military alliances, escalation in the
development of a new generation of nuclear weapons and delivery systems, in the
nuclear weapon states. It is our conviction the threat of nuclear weapons use is
counterproductive. It provides a very strong incentive for proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
Kenya urges the nuclear weapon states to address issues relating to the implementation
of their NPT Article VI commitments. We firmly believe in the importance of the
universality of the NPT and appeal to India, Pakistan, the Democratic Peoples Republic
of Korea and Israel to join the Treaty. 
Ivlr. Chairman,
As I mentioned earlier, Kenya welcomes the outcome of the Conference on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons hosted by Noway on the 4'h and 5'h March,
2013. It was indeed a significant event. The high number of countries that took part on
the evidence based discussions on these effects highlights the interests and concerns of
the wider international community. It reinforces our view that nations serious enough
about the elimination of nuclear weapons need to start negotiations now on a treaty to
ban them.
We believe the initiative can be pivotal in the delegitimization of nuclear weapons in the
minds of people. Nuclear deterrence really is: threatening mass extermination. The
impact of use of nuclear weapons or an accident at a nuclear weapons facility would be
catastrophic. Their use would violate Resolutions of the UN General Assembly that have
repeatedly condemned their use as an international crime.
Needless to state, the debate on humanitarian concerns can contribute lo meaningful
nuclear disarmament anflfioliferation measures as well as to the implementation of the
NPT Action Plan. ~~
Mr. Chairman,
Kenya reaffirms it commitment to peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We recognize the
contribution that nuclear energy can bring to the consolidation of peace and sustainable
development in Kenya as well as many other developing countries. In Africa, the
peaceful use of nuclear energy, especially in the field of human and animal health,
agriculture, water resources, and the production of electricity would be immensely
beneficial. We believe every State Party has an inalienable right to the free access to
nuclear energy and technology for peaceful purposes and sustainable development in
accordance with Article IV of NPT.
Kenya highly val~les the Treaty of Pelindaba. We believe the treaty prcvides a i~seful
framework for African Member States who may opt to develop nuclear energy for their
sustainable development to do so in a responsible manner. In this context, we urge the
international community to redouble its efforts to convene a conference on the
establishment of a nuclear free zone in the Middle East.
My delegation believes the IAEA Technical Cooperation programme can play a
significant role in facilitating access to nuclear power and providing effective technical
cooperation to State Parties, especially developing countries.
However, unless the Technical Cooperation Fund is reviewed to ensure predictable
resources. its assistance will fall short.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, It is clear there is still a lot of work that has to be done to
implement the NPT Action Plan by 2015, it will require greater effort and commitment by
State Parties to make progress in our quest to rid ihe world of nuclear weapons.
Thank you for your attention. 