Mr. Chairman,
I am pleased to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the chairmanship of the 2008 NPT Preparatory Committee. 1 wish you success in your endeavors and promise you the full support of our delegation.
Mr. Chairman.
We gather in Geneva at a difficult and perhaps defining moment for the Nuclear Non-Proliferate on Treaty. It is not an exaggeration to state that we face what arguably is the greatest set of nuclear challenges since the NPT entered into force in 1970. These dangers include the growing risk of nuclear terrorism, the erosion of disarmament and nonproliferation norms, the weakness of the "strengthened NPT review process," noncompliance by states with their NPT obligations, and complacency on the part of too many States Parties about the magnitude and urgency of these challenges. As such, my delegation is convinced that we must utilize this meeting of the Preparatory Committee to revive and reinforce the spirit of cooperation and forward thinking about nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation evident at the 2000 NPT Review Conference, but general])7 lacking at the most recent Review Conference in 2005.
Toward this goal, Mr. Chairman, my delegation hopes that this Preparatory Committee session will contribute to the strengthening of the review process as envisaged by the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and reiterated and clarified by the 2000 NPT Review Conference. My delegation is pleased that States Parties were able to resole many of the contentious procedural issues at the first session of the 2010 NPT Review Conference ably chaired by Ambassador Yukiya Amano, and is hopeful that attention now can be directed to matters of substance relating to the implementation of the Treaty, Decisions 1 and 2 and the
Resolution on the Middle East from the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, as well as the outcome of the 2000 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
At the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the Kyrgyz Republic applauded the adoption without a vote of three interconnected decisions and a resolution on the Middle East. Five years later, my delegation also supported the adoption of the final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. This document presented a pragmatic and forward-looking set of disarmament and nonproliferalion objectives. Today, however, we must acknowledge that our initial high expectations from 1995 and 2000 remain, at best, only partially realized. Especially disappointing is the continued stalemate at the Conference on Disarmament, the failure to bring the Comprehensive Test Ban Treat)' into force, lack of visible progress in negotiating a verifiable Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, and the demise of both negotiated and voluntary reductions in strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons.
It is my delegation's hope that during this second session of the 2010 Review Conference we will address implementation of the practical steps toward disarmament adopted at the 2000 Review Conference and discuss means to accelerate the reduction of all categories of nuclear weapons in a verifiable and irreversible fashion. My delegation shares the views of those States Parties, who attach particular importance to the expeditious entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, a treaty the Kyrgyz Republic ratified in October 2003.
Mr. Chairman,
One of the most promising approaches to disarmament and nonproliferation is the creation of nuclear-weapons-free zones, which cover nearly the entire Southern Hemisphere, in addition to the Antarctic, the seabed, and outer space. The important role played by these zones is recognized by the United Nations, which in 1999 adopted by consensus a set of guidelines for their establishment.
In 1995, the NPT review process first took note of the efforts of the Central Asian states to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region.
This initiative led to the negotiation of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, which was signed on September 8, 2006 and was ratified by the Kyrgyzstan,  at Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan. The five Central Asian state are united in their
belief that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among our states, and taking into account our region's special characteristics, is an important disarmament and nonproliferation accomplishment thai will strengthen peace and security at the regional and global levels. We also call attention to the innovative nonproliferation feature of the zone, which requires States Parties to adhere to the International Atomic Energy Agency's Additional Protocol.
Mr. Chairman,
The Kyrgyz Republic regards the NPT to be the cornerstone of the nuclear nonproliferation regime. Our republic recognizes, however, that the world has changed significantly in recent years and confronts new proliferation challenges. In order for it to persevere, the Treaty and the broader regime must adapt to these changing circumstances, which include the growing risk of nuclear terrorism. I am proud to note that Kyrgyzstan had joined to the Global Intiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorizm.
My delegation regards international safeguards and physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities as the first line of defense against nuclear terrorism. As such, the Kyrgyz Republic strongly endorses the International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to strengthen the international safeguards system, including adoption of the Additional Protocol as the safeguards standard. They Kyrgyz Republic signed the Additional Protocol in January 2007 and soon intends to ratify this important verification instrument.
The Kyrgyz Republic also supports ongoing efforts to strengthen the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 in order to address the new proliferation challenges posed by non-state actors. In this regard, the Kyrgyz Republic is pleased to have hosted an international workshop in Bishkek last fall in support of the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1540.
Creative efforts must be undertaken to reduce the possibility that terrorists could gain access to fissile material, and especially highly-enriched uranium, which could be used to make crude nuclear weapons. The Kyrgyz Republic supports efforts, such as those introduced by Norway at the 2005 NPT Review Conference, to enhance the security of existing stockpiles of highly-enriched uranium, while minimizing its use in the civilian nuclear sector. The Kyrgyz Republic also supports increased efforts to reinforce export controls and to combat illicit
trafficking in nuclear material, and has adopted a variety of domestic laws consistent with this objective.
Mr. Chairman,
Inadequate attention has been given in the past to the serious issue of mitigating the environmental consequences of nuclear weapons programs. As first articulated at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, and as noted in the consensus Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference, there have been exceptional instances in which serious environmental consequences have resulted from uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities in the production of nuclear weapons. This often overlooked environmental problem caused by nuclear weapons production and borne by the Kyrgyz Republic and other states, is another reason why my delegation and others from our region attach great importance to the work of this Preparatory Committee. In this connection, we are pleased to note oui" accession last year to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.
There are 92 different tailings with toxic radioactive wastes left by the mining industry on the territory of the Kyrgyz Republic. Some of this radioactive waste is located on trans-boundary rivers with Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Kazakhstan. As such, it is necessary to take well-conditioned and effective efforts at all levels to prevent further contamination. My delegation deeply appreciates the efforts made by the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Asian Development Bank, and the International Atomic Energy Agency in assisting the Kyrgyz to redress this serious environmental and economic problem and hopes that these efforts will be expanded to complete the necessary rehabilitation in affected areas. We also would like to reiterate the call made at prior Preparatory Committee sessions for national governments and other international organizations to consider giving appropriate assistance to expedite the clean-up and disposal of radioactive contaminants in our region, and to support the Kyrgyz Republic and the UNDP in convening an International Conference to find a comprehensive solution to the problem. In this regard, I would like to direct your attention to the attachment to my written statement, an Appeal of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, the UNDP, and the Secretariat of the Integration Committee of the Eurasian Economic Community, made in Bishkek on 7 September 2007."
M\ delegation also wishes to draw attention to another vital but often neglected issue—the role of education and training as tools to promote disarmament and nonproliferation. The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the recommendations of the LIN Experts Group on the subject and shares the opinion expressed in UN General Assembly Resolution 57/60, adopted without a vote in fall 2002, thai "the need has never been greater for disarmament and nonproliferation education." We appreciate the leadership shown by Japan, among other Stales Parties, in continuing to raise the issue of education and training in the NPT context, and we look forward 10 working with other interested member Stales in developing practical steps to assist the implementation of the measures called for by the UN study. In this regard, we welcome two special events related to disarmament and nonproliferation education that will be held during this session of the Preparatory Committee. We also call attention to our plan to establish a regional resource center on issues of nuclear proliferation and nuclear waste management and welcome international cooperation in this matter.
Mr. Chairman,
As we begin the second session of the 20] 0 NPT Review Conference we would do well to recall the words of former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan at the opening of the 2005 Review Conference, who worried that a weakened NPT would make a nuclear catastrophe more likely. Addressing the assembled delegates, he asked how they would respond to the question: "Could I have done more to reduce the risk by strengthening the regime designed to do so?"
The answer to that question then and today obviously is "ves." We cannot continue with business as usual. The risks of inaction are too great.
Although the great promise of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference package of disarmament and nonproliferation decisions has not yet been fulfilled, we must not lose sight of the principles and objectives that were then articulated and remain as compelling today as before.
Mr. Chairman,
The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the opportunity to find common ground on the most important disarmament and nonproliferation issues in order to ensure the long-term integrity, effectiveness, and relevance of the NPT. My delegation pledges to work with you to accomplish that outcome.
APPEAL
of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, United Nations Development Prog ram (UNDP) and the Secretariat of the Integration Committee of the
Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC) to the governments, international financial organizations and development agencies, representatives of the private sector and other organizations on the risk of possible radiological contamination in Central Asia
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, United Nations Development Programme and the Secretariat of the Integration Committee of EurAsEC:
-	Considering the special importance of ensuring the protection of health and other fundamental human rights from the impacts oi" natural and technological disasters for current and future generations,
-	Supporting and welcoming the increasing attention of the international community of nations to environmental problems, including those identified in the Millennium Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals.
-	Taking into account the international agreements aimed to protect the environment and maintain the ecological balance.
-	Attaching priorii}- to the implementation of active preventive measures to provide environmental, economic and socio-political stability in the interest of sustainable human development and growth of welfare, and
-	Considering the dangerous situation of numerous waste tailings in the territory of the Kyrgyz Republic, containing large volumes of uranium and other highly hazardous, technological wastes.
Have come to common conclusion to sign the following Appeal:
The territory of Kyrgyz Republic has many burial sites containing uranium and toxic metals, as well as other highly hazardous, technological wastes - a legacy left by the military and related to military industries of the former USSR. The conditions of the tailings did not fully correspond to safety standards during the period when these industries were active. Moreover, the state of these tailings has further deteriorated over the past decades, after those industries were shutdown or reoriented, and in a number of cases the situation is close to catastrophic.
This situation is deteriorated by the fact that mam burial sites of highly toxic and firslh uranium waste are located in activc seismic regions, landslide risk areas, prone to floods and high groundwater zones and nearby river banks, which form the- foundation of the extended water basin of the Central Asian region. Many tailings are located in close vicinity to populated areas.
Therefore, this accumulated industrial waste in the Kyrgyz Republic over the mam* decades of the last century industrial waste poses a threat not only to the Kyrgyz Republic, but also to the whole Central Asia. In the event of natural or man-made disasters, natural degradation of protective structures, the highly toxic substances from these lailings will surely seep into the rivers and other fresh water sources. The waste can quickly and freely spread across the vast termor) of the region, which will lead to large-scale contamination of vast territories of the ad joining countries, with a population of tens of millions people.
Such a scenario will result in an environmental catastrophe not only national and regional but of a global scale. The consequences will be difficult to resolve. It will take up an extended amount of time, and huge financial expenditures and other resources.
Today, the Kyrgyz Republic has no financial or other required resources for the proper technical maintenance and reconstruction of these tailings. Acquiring new loans for these purposes is also impossible, due to the high level of foreign debt of the country.
The agreement concluded between the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and the World Bank fWBj. UNDP and other international organizations provided resources for priority actions in the mosL critical sites. However, these resources are nor enough for a comprehensive solution of the problem.
Only with broader and targeted assistance of the international community it is possible to take effective measures to prevent an environmental calamity. We should not forget that environmental problems will have an unavoidably strong and destabilizing impact on economic growth measures of the national governments, in the region, in their effort to increase the well being of their citizens and the level of social standards. High risk of ecological catastrophe may destroy positive tendencies of the recent years, achieved with the assistance of the international community.
We call on the donor countries, international financial institutions, development agencies and non-governmental organizations to pay attention to this problem, lend the maximum possible help for its solution and to assist in ihe implementation of preventive measures, by avoiding the pending environmental catastrophe on a grant basis.
We address the representatives of the private sector with the proposal to make investments into projects related with waste process tailings, applying the highest contemporary technologies, with condition that they will strictly observe Che national legislation and international norms of uranium and other toxic waste processing, with further use of the received products.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic is ready to conduct negotiations on that; required assistance, on preparation relevant investment projects on its own, or with the participation of the Uh*DP and Secretariat of the Integration Committee of EurAsEC, using different mechanisms and best practice of other countries.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic will ensure the coordination work at the national and international levels, within this Appeal.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. UNDP and Secretariat of the Integration Committee of EurAsEC, recognizing the importance of this problem, hope for the support for solutions and express confidence that by joint effort we will help millions of people in Central Asia to escape the ecological tragedy ana give them a chance to live without fear for their and their children's future.
