Mr. President:
Allow me to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the 2005 NPT Review Conference. I would like to use this opportunity to express sincere thanks to UN Secretary General H.E Mr. Kofi Annan for his introductory statement.
This meeting comes at a time of very serious challenges to the global nonproliferation regime, but it also provides an opportunity to revive and reinforce the spirit of cooperation for nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation evident at the 2000 NPT Review Conference. We must avail ourselves of this opportunity and devise innovative but practical measures to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty in all of its dimensions.
Toward that end, Mr. President, my delegation hopes that this conference will produce a document with two components: a review of the results of the implementation of the Treaty during the past five years, and a forward-looking examination of the areas in which and the means by which further progress can be achieved.
Mr., President,
At the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the Kyrgyz Republic applauded the adoption without a vote of three interconnected decisions and a resolution on the Middle East. Five years later, my delegation also welcomed the adoption of the final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. This document laid out a pragmatic, forward-looking set of objectives for the nonproliferation regime. Today, however, we must acknowledge that our initial high expectations from 1995 and 2000 remain, at best, only partially fulfilled.
Mr. President,
My delegation shares the views of many States Parties that the program of 13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament has not been met for the most part and, in some instances, has actually experienced regression. The Conference on Disarmament remains stalled, only limited headway has been made in bringing the CTBT into force, the ABM Treaty has been repudiated, there is no visible progress in negotiating a Fissile Material Treaty, and, if anything, nuclear weapons have acquired a greater role in the security policies of some Nuclear Weapons States.
The May 2002 Moscow Treaty represents progress toward reducing nuclear weapons. However, it does not do so in an irreversible fashion and does not adequately address the serious proliferation and nuclear terrorism threats posed by non-strategic nuclear weapons. It is my delegation's hope that this Review Conference will assess the implementation of the practical steps toward disarmament adopted at the 2000 Review Conference and discuss means to accelerate the reduction of all categories of nuclear weapons in a transparent and irreversible fashion.
Mr. President,
A positive nonproliferation development in recent years has been the establishment of nuclear- weapon-free zones in Africa and Southeast Asia. Nuclear-weapon-free zones now cover nearly the whole of the Southern Hemisphere, in addition to the Antarctic, the seabed, and outer space. As nuclear-weapon-free zones have expanded geographically, they have also become stronger instruments of nonproliferation. In 1999, the United Nations Disarmament Commission recognized the important role played by these zones and reached consensus on a set of guidelines for their establishment.
Ten years ago the 1995 Review and Extension Conference first recognized the initiative of the Central Asian States to create a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in the region. The Kyrgyz Republic is pleased to note the significant progress that has been achieved recently toward establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. Following a meeting of representatives of the five Central Asian States in Tashkent on 7-9 February 2005, the States issued a statement announcing that they had finalized the complete text of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. The Kyrgyz Republic anticipates that the treaty will be signed very soon. The five Central Asian state are united in their belief that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among our states, and taking into account its special characteristics, will strengthen peace and security at the regional and global levels.
Mr. President,
The Kyrgyz Republic always has regarded the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as the cornerstone of the nuclear nonproliferation regime, and it continues to do so. It also recognizes, however, that the world has changed dramatically in recent years. New proliferation challenges have emerged and old ways of doing business will no longer suffice. In order for it to persevere the Treaty must adapt to these new challenges, and the nonproliferation strategy and tactics of States Parties must take account of these new realities.
Many continents have been the scene of horrendous terrorist attacks since the past Review Conference, and all Member States recognize the importance of taking effective measures to prevent possible terrorist acquisition and use of weapons of mass destruction. Adequate safeguards and physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities remain the first-line of defense against nuclear terrorism. The Kyrgyz Republic strongly endorses the International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to strengthen the international safeguards system. In this regard, the Kyrgyz Republic is pleased to report that on 3 February 2004 its safeguards agreement with the IAEA entered into force, and it soon plans to complete the steps necessary to put in place the Additional Protocol to the safeguards agreement. The Kyrgyz Republic also supports ongoing efforts to strengthen the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 in order to address the new proliferation challenges posed by non-state actors.
Creative efforts must be undertaken to reduce the possibility that terrorists could gain access to fissile material, and especially highly-enriched uranium, which might be used to fabricate crude nuclear weapons. The Kyrgyz Republic believes this Review Conference should consider means to enhance the security of existing stockpiles of highly-enriched uranium, while consolidating them, reducing their size, and moving toward the elimination of the use of highly-enriched uranium in the civilian nuclear sector. The Kyrgyz Republic also supports increased efforts to reinforce export controls and to combat illicit trafficking in sensitive nuclear material.
Kyrgyzstan notes with great satisfaction the adoption by the General Assembly on April 13, 2005 of the Convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism, initiated by the Russian Federation. Upon conclusion this difficult work, we wish to thank the UN Special Committee on Terrorism and all of the delegations that participated in drafting the text of the Convention. The delegation of the Kyrgyz Republic is convinced that this Convention represents a worthy contribution in the battle against international terrorism and will strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Attention also should be given to mitigating the environmental consequences of past and present nuclear weapons programs. As noted in the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference, which received consensus support, there have been exceptional instances in which serious environmental consequences have resulted from uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities in the production of nuclear weapons. This often overlooked environmental problem caused by nuclear weapons production and borne by the Kyrgyz Republic and other states, is another reason why we attach great importance to the work of the Review Conference. We would like to reiterate the call made at the 2000 NPT Review Conference for all Governments and international organizations that have expertise in the field of cleanup and disposal of radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assistance as may be requested for remedial purposes in these affected areas.
The Kyrgyz Republic also draws attention to the vital but underutilized role education and training can play as disarmament and nonproliferation tools. My delegation welcomes the recommendations of the UN experts group study on the subject and shares the opinion expressed in UN General Assembly Resolution 57/60, adopted without a vote in fall 2002, that "the need has never been greater for disarmament and nonproliferation education." We believe there are a number of practical steps that can be taken within the context of the NPT Review Conference to assist the implementation of the measures called for by the UN study, and we will work with other interested Member States to achieve this objective.
Mr. President,
The world is a very different place than it was ten years ago when States Parties met in this hall to forge a remarkable package of disarmament and nonproliferation decisions. Although the great promise of that occasion has not been fulfilled, we must not lose sight of the principles and objectives which were then articulated and remain as compelling today as before. Mr. President, my delegation welcomes the opportunity at this Review Conference to work with you and others States Parties to find common ground on the most important disarmament and nonproliferation issues in order to ensure the long-term integrity, effectiveness, and relevance of the NPT.
My delegation pledges to work with you, Mr. President, to accomplish that outcome. Thank you.
