
I am pleased to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. I wish you success in your endeavors and promise you the full support of our delegation.
Mr. President
' i We gather in New York at a critical juncture in the history of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty. It is a time when the NPT faces extraordinary
challenges, but also one in which there are new and very positive developments,
including the signing of the U.S.-Russian START Follow-on Treaty. My
delegation is convinced that we must utilize this Review Conference to seize upon
the new spirit of cooperation with respect to disarmament and nonproliferation so
as to strengthen the Treaty as envisaged by the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference.
Mr. President,
One of the most promising approaches to disarmament and nonproliferation is the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones. As it was highlighted last week at the Second International Conference on Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, such zones now cover the entire Southern Hemisphere, and also extend into the Northern Hemisphere, including territory on which nuclear weapons were previously based. 2009 was especially notable for the entry-into-force of two new treaties covering nuclear-weapon-free-zones, including one in Central Asia. Among the innovative features of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty are provisions that call for efforts to remediate the environmental damage to the region resulting from prior nuclear weapons activities and the requirement for parties to adhere to the IAEA Additional Protocol.
The five Central Asian states are united in their belief that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among our states, and taking into account our region's special characteristics, is an important disarmament and nonproliferation accomplishment that will strengthen peace and security at the regional and global levels. Among the innovative features of the treaty are provisions that call for efforts to remediate the environmental damage in the region resulting from prior nuclear weapons activities and the requirement for parties to adhere to the IAEA Additional Protocol.
Mr. President,
The Kyrgyz Republic always has regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of the nuclear nonproliferation regime, and it continues to do so. It also recognizes, however, that the world has changed significantly in recent years. New proliferation challenges have emerged and old ways of doing business will no longer suffice. In order for it to persevere, the Treaty and the broader regime must adapt to these changing circumstances, which include the growing risk of nuclear terrorism. My delegation regards international safeguards and physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities as the first line of defense against nuclear terrorism. As such, the Kyrgyz Republic strongly endorses the' International Atomic Energy Agency's efforts to strengthen the international safeguards system, including adoption of the Additional Protocol as the safeguards standard. The Kyrgyz Republic also supports efforts to strengthen the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 in order to address the new proliferation challenges posed by non-state actors, and it regards the practical measures identified in the Communique and Work Plan of the Nuclear Security Summit to be of particular significance.
Mr. President,
My delegation attaches great importance to the issue of mitigating the environmental consequences of uranium mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities in the production of nuclear weapons, a subject identified at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and also addressed in the consensus Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. The Kyrgyz Republic would like to reiterate the call made at prior Review Conferences, for all governments and international organizations that have expertise in the field of clean-up and disposal of radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assistance as may be requested for remedial purposes.
In this regard, my delegation would like to call attention to an important meeting on this topic, which was held in Bishkek 21-24 April 2009. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in cooperation with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Eurasian Economic Community organized the Regional Conference to discuss practical measures on solution of the uranium tailings problems. On 29 June 2009 the High Level International Forum on uranium tailings and other radioactive wastes was held in Geneva.
Mr. President,
My delegation also wishes to draw attention to another vital but often neglected issue—the role of education and training as tools to promote disarmament and nonproliferation. ■ The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the recommendations of the UN Experts Group on the subject and shares the opinion expressed in UN General Assembly Resolution 57/60, adopted without a vote in fall 2002, which "the need has never been greater for disarmament and nonproliferation education." We appreciate the leadership shown by Japan, among other States Parties, in continuing to raise the issue in the NPT context, and we look forward to working with other interested members States in developing practical steps to assist the implementation of the measures called for by the UN study.
Mr. President,
As we begin the 2010 NPT Review Conference my delegation fully appreciates the enormous challenges we face with respect to nuclear disarmament, nonproliferation, and peaceful uses, as well as the need for urgent action. We pledge to work tirelessly with you and other States Parties in order to find practical means to ensure the long-term integrity, effectiveness, and relevance of the NPT.
Thank you for your kind attention.

















Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



