Opening Statement by the delegation of the I<yrgyz Rcpnblic to tlic Second Session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 lieview Conference of the I'arties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(23 April 2014)
Mr. Chainnan,
I an pleased to join the previous delegations in congratulating on your assuniption orthe
chairlnaiiship of the 20 13 NPT Preparatoly Committee. I wish you success in your
endeavors and promise you the full support of lily delegation.
Mr. Chainnan.
We gather in Geneva at a tinie when tlie Nuclear Non-Proliferizlion 'l'reaty aces a numl?er
of challenges. Ilowever, it is also a time when tliere are a nuinber of new opportunities to
advance nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation goals. My delegation is convinced that
we must utilize this ~iieeti~ig ofthe Preparatory Coni~nittee to build upon the spirit of
cooperation and forward thinking that was evident at the 201 0 N1'T' Review Conference,
and also was reflected in the action tal<cn on a variety of procedural niatters last year at the
PrepColn in Vienna.
Toward this goal, my delegation hopes that this Preparatory Committee session will
contribute to the strengthening of the review process as envisaged by the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference and help set the stage Tor an even inore successf~~l
Review Conference in 20 1 5.
My delegation loolts forward lo the reports by States Pasties to the 'I'rcaty on the progress
that has been niade during the past year in in~pleme~iting the Action Plan and
recommendztions of the 201 0 lteview Cosiference. Especially, we are iiitcrested in those of
the Nuclear Weapons States on their concrete actions already_lalteii and plans to reduce all
categories of nuclear weapons in a transparent aiid irreversible fashion. 
Mr. Cliairnian,
One of tlie most promising approaches to tlisaniiatiient and nonproliferation is the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones. 'l'lie I<yl.y,)/z Ilcpublic taltes pride in the entry-into-l'orce in
2009 of the Central Asian Nuclear-Wc:~po~~.-I:l.ee Zone. Among the innovative features of
that zone are provisions that call for cl'i'orts Lo rcmediate thc environmental daniage to the
region resulting fro111 prior nuclear wciil>otls activities and the requirement for palties to
adhere to tlie IA13A Additional I'rotocol.
Icyrgyzstan shares tlic concerns of many N1"l States Parties that we can ill dford further
delay in iniplcnienting the 1'995 Resoluliol~ on thc Middle East and the convening of a
Conference on tlic cstahlishmcnt of a Mititllc last zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons or tiiass destr~ction as nian(lalcd by the 2010 NP'T Review Conference. We
are disappoinled that 20 12 I-lelsinlti con l'crcnce has been postponed. My delegation
suppoifs eSrorts ol'thc Sacilitator Mr. I,i~:!ja\:a of Finland and co-convener states to hold the
conference in thc nearest Si~ture. It is OLII. liopc the States of the region will participate and
start a dialog~tc on vital issi~es or regiont~l s~c~~rity.
Mr. Chairn~an.
The ICyrgyz i<epuhlic has always regarilecl tlie N~I''1' as the cornerstone of the nuclear
no~iprolife~.iltio~i regime, and it continues lo tlo so anid the newly emerged challenges.
At a national level, 1Cyrgyzstan activcly implements United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1540. Our Government has recently adopted an Action Plan to address the
proliferation challeviges posed by non-state actors. 111 this connection, we would welcome
technical assistance to increasc national ixpocily in this field.
In order li,r it to remain viablc, the 'l'rc:iiy and [lie broader regime niust adapt to clianging
circurnshnces, whicli include the growil~g risk of nuclear terrorism. My delegation regards
international safeguards and physical pi.otcction of n~~clear materials and facilities as the
first line ofclcfcnsc against nuclear tc~.ror.isti~.
The 1Cyrgyz IZepilhlic sul~ports efforts IO slrcnglhen the Convention on I'hysical Protection
of Nuclear Material. 1 an1 pleased to i111l)rm Lliat we have completed internal procedures on
accession llic Convention. 
As such, the Icyrgyz Republic stro~lgly endorses the International Atomic Energy Agency's
efforts to strengthen the interliatioiial safeguards system, including adoption of the
Additional I'rotocol as the safeguards standard. We also welco~ne the practical measures
identified in the Communiquis of the 2010 and 20 12 Nuclear Security Summits.
Mr. Chainnan,
My delegation attaches great importance to the issue of mitigating the e~ivironmeiital
consequences of ura~iiuin mining and associated nuclear fuel cycle activities in the
production of nuclear weapons, a subject identified at the 1905 NPT Review and Extension
Conference and addressed at all subsequent Review Coii'erences. The Icyrgyz Republic
would like to reiterate the call made at prior Review Co~~ferences, for all governments and
international organizations that have exlserlise in the field of clean-up aid disposal of
radioactive contaminants to consider giving appropriate assista~ice as may be requested for
remedial purposes in these affected areas.
My delegation also wishes to draw attention to another vital but often neglected issue--the
role of education aid training as tools t:o promote disar~niament aiid nonproliferation. The
lcyrgyz Republic welconies the inclusioii in the 2010 Final Uocu~iient of Action 22, which
calls on all states to innplement the recommendations of the UN study on disarrnalnent and
nonproliferation education.
We appreciate tlie leadership shown by Japan, among other State Parties, in continuing to
raise the issue of education and training in tlie NIT context, and we look forward to
worlting with other interested inember States in developing practical steps to promote ill1
i~nplementation ofthe lineasuses called for by the UN study.
Mr. Chainnan,
As we begin the second session of the 2015 NPT licview Conference my delegation
recognizes the enonnous cliallcnges we face with respect to nuclear disarmament,
nonproliferation, and peach1 usc, as well as ilic need for timely action. We pledge to
work with you and other Statcs Parties to find common ground and to put in place practical
means to ensure the loiig-term integrity, effectiveness, and relevaice of the NPT.
1 thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
