STATEMENT BY
MR. MAFIROANE MOTANYANE
CHARGE’ D’ AFFAIRES a.i  
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND HEAD OF DELEGATION  
DELIVERED AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW
CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE
NON PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA: 23 APRIL 2013
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Mr. Chairman,
Thank you for giving me the floor. I congratulate you on your election to steer the
work of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non‐Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. I also congratulate other members of the Bureau on their election.  I
assure you of my delegation’s full support.  
I align myself with the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non‐Aligned Movement (NAM). However, allow me to add a few
remarks on my national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
The objective to achieve a world without nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction is the raison d’être for the formation of the United Nations. It is
not surprising that one of the very first resolutions adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 1946, called for “the total elimination from national armaments of
atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction”.
With a view to giving impetus to the noble effort of ridding the world of these
weapons, the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was
adopted in 1968.   
The NPT is the only legal regime for preventing the spread of nuclear weapons
and weapons technology, promoting cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and furthering the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament. Yet, more than
four decades since its adoption, the NPT has not attained universality. Its
implementation is beset by various setbacks. Thousands of nuclear weapons
remain in stockpiles  ‐  threatening the extinction of humanity. There is still no
international ban on nuclear weapons testing as the Comprehensive Nuclear Test
Ban Treaty grapples to garner the requisite number of ratifications for its entry
into force.   
Mr. Chairman,
The mere existence of nuclear weapons presents a possibility of their accidental
or intentional use, moreso as some of them remain in high alert. Regrettably,
some Nuclear Weapon States have engaged in modernisation programmes of
their nuclear weapons and arsenals. If anything, the number of States aspiring to
possess nuclear weapons is steadily increasing, and indeed endangering the
security of humankind more than ever before. The recent nuclear tests conducted
in the Korean Peninsula are a clear sign that others are still under the illusion that
possession of these weapons is a way of providing security and power. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Nuclear weapons make the world even more
unsafe, hence the call for their total eradication.
  
On a positive note, we are encouraged by the efforts of the Nuclear Weapon
States (NWS) to discharge their obligations under the NPT. In particular, the
implementation of the new START Treaty between the United States and the
Russian Federation is a positive step in the right direction. However, much more
still needs to be done. We urge all the NWS to restore our trust in them that they
are determined to implement the 13 Practical Steps towards nuclear
disarmament in a verifiable and irreversible manner. We look forward to their
report in the 2014 PrepComm Session as well as the 2015 Review Conference. The
obligation to prove that they are not determined to retain these weapons
indefinitely squarely reposes on them.  
Mr. Chairman,
Three years ago a successful Review Conference was held which culminated in the
adoption of a consensus outcome document and a 64 comprehensive Plan of
Action. That achievement brought about high expectations that decades of
negotiations on the need for a safer and more secure world without nuclear
weapons would soon bear fruition. Sadly, we all bear witness to the fact that
implementation of the outcome document and the plan of action remains a
challenge. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us to meet the challenges that lie
ahead if we were to avoid eroding the credibility of the NPT. With two more years
left before the next Review Conference a lot can be achieved. We need to build
on the momentum generated by the 2010 Review Conference and fully
implement the Plan of Action as we prepare for the next Review Conference.
Lesotho stands ready to play its part in the implementation of the said Action
Plan.
It would be remiss of us not to join others in expressing our disappointment at the
failure to hold the International Conference on the Middle East Zone Free of
Nuclear Weapons in 2012 for no clear justification. We should never forget that
the establishment of nuclear weapons free zones is critical for sustaining progress
towards nuclear disarmament and non‐proliferation. It is a confidence building
measure that breeds trust. In this regard, we call on the Conveners to expedite
the holding of the Conference, at least before the end of the current year.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT clearly acknowledges the right of all States Parties to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. There is no denying that peaceful uses of nuclear
energy improve the lives of people all around the world. The contemporary
challenges such as energy security and sustainable development can adequately
be addressed by using nuclear technology. However, this right must be exercised
in a safe and secure manner and with due regard to the Parties’ non‐proliferation
obligations under the Treaty.  
The importance of international cooperation and assistance, as well as scaling up
of assistance to developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
cannot be overemphasized. In the same breath cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is absolutely essential. We must all
accept the IAEA safeguards to verify that nuclear activities serve only peaceful
purposes. At the same time, we must respect the independence and expertise of
the Agency and refrain from politicizing it or unduly interfering in its activities.  
Mr. Chairman,
I wish to conclude by pointing out that all is not lost. There is still hope that our
noble objective of ensuring that humanity lives in peace, freedom and without
fear of extinction shall be achieved. We need to bridge the gulf between rhetoric
and action, and fast track the implementation of the NPT. The current Session of
the PrepComm presents an excellent opportunity for increased momentum
towards fulfilling our commitments for nuclear disarmament, non‐proliferation
and peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the NPT. In the same breadth, let us
join hands in calling the States not party to the NPT to consider joining the Treaty
without further delay.  
I thank you