[Check against delivery]
General Statement by Ambassador Rytis Paulauslas, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Lithuania to the UN Office and Other International Organisations in Geneva
Second session of the Preparatory Committee for the NPT Review Conference
Geneva, 22 April - 3 May 2013
Mr Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Ambassador Cornel Feruta, upon your election to
chair the Second Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference and by wishing
success to you recognizing the difficult task and great responsibility that awaits you. You may
count, Mr Chairman, on the co-operation and full support of the Lithuanian delegation.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement made by the European Union and wishes to briefly
touch upon some issues of particular importance to my country.
Entering into the second half in the 2015 Review cycle, Lithuania stands committed to the NPT
as the essential foundation for the achievement of nuclear disarmament, as the cornerstone of the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime and as the basis for the development of the peaceful uses
of nuclear technology for those who choose to do so.
Remaining a staunch supporter of global efforts in countering nuclear security threats, Lithuania
wclcomes the successful on-going implementation of the agreement between the United States of
America and the Russian Federation on the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START), as well
as the very successful second Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul that lay a firm background for
intensified international coopcration in strengthening nuclear security threats worldwide.
Keeping to its commitment assumed at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit (NSS), we have
established the Nuclear Security Centre of Excellence in Medininkai, Lithuania in 2012. The
Ccntre would contribute to the international efforts in securing nuclear materials and preventing
illicit trafficking. The vision of the Centre is to serve as the capacity building and training venue
for relevant Lithuanian institutions in preventing, detecting, responding and investigating
eventual cases of nuclear and radiological smuggling. The Centre aim is to become regional,
accommodating Nordic-Baltic potential and providing training and exchange of best practices for
all interested countries in our rcgion.
Recognizing the serious threat of nuclear terrorism, Lithuania reaffirms her commitment in
strengthening nuclear security, including by fully implementing relevant international
requirements, and is looking forward to the third NSS to be held in The Hague next year. In this 
regard Lithuania also welcomes the International Conference on Nuclear Security to be convened
by the IAEA in Vienna from July IS' -5th, 2013.
Mr Chairman,
Lithuania has been playing an active role in Proliferation Security Initiative and supports the
principles of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which gave a new impetus for
enhanced cooperation to prcvent illegal transfers of nuclear material and equipment. As
multilateral export control regimes are very important in this regard, therefore, further efforts are
needed to strengthen and extend the control regime which now includes all the EU states and
comprises a single market to all export control regimes to be useful and necessary.
Lithuania reiterates its enduring commitment to the goal of general and complete disarmament
and the world free of nuclear weapons. Until we reach this goal, effective measures related to
nuclear arms control and further disarmament, especially reduction in the global stockpile of
nuclear weapons, remain of utmost importance. As a next logical step we see thc issue of nonstrategic
weapons, primarily given their absence from arms reduction treaties. It is a priority,
which needs to be addressed through the final fulfilment of the 1991 and 1992 Presidential
Nuclear Initiatives known as PNIs. Verifiable reductions and ultimate elimination of these
weapons, including through reciprocal, gradual, transparent and timely codification of PNIs,
must be an integral part of the nuclear arms control and disarmament process.
Another important milestone as regards the goal of general and complete disarmament is the
CTBT treaty that needs to be ratified, especially by the annex 2 States, so that it can enter into
force. Lithuania urges all States Parties that have not yet done so, to sign and ratify CTBT,
without delay and without any conditions.
If we really want to achieved the goal of global zero, the international community, all states and
the NGO community must do all we can for a quick and resolute start of the negotiations on a
verifiable treaty to ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices (FMCT). If the Conference on Disarmament cannot find a quick fix to its
deadloclc perhaps we should draw some conclusions from the recent example of negotiating the
Arms Trade Treaty. The FMCT remains coherent next step towards a world without nuclear
weapons. Pending such negotiations, all States possessing nuclear weapons should declare and
maintain a moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. In this regard
we invite the Group of Governmental Experts to put forward concrete recommendations on
aspects that would give a much needed impetus towards this essential move on the multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation agenda.
Lithuania strongly supports the efforts of the IAEA to improve effectiveness and efficiency of
the Agency's safeguards system based on assessment of the correctness and completeness of the
State's declarations to the IAEA concerning nuclear material and nuclear-related activities.
Lithuania considers that the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement together with the Additional
Protocol currently represent the verification standard which needs to be further strengthened,
universalized and applied as a condition for nuclear material and technology supply. 
Indeed, universalization of the Additional Protocol will considerably increase confidence for
international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and contribute to enhancing
global security. Therefore, Lithuania invites all States especially the ones currently operating
nuclear power plants or planning to construct them in the future to undertake necessary steps to
bring the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement into force, as well as to sign, ratify and
implement the Additional Protocol.
We underline the key role that the IAEA plays in assisting Member States to develop and
implement national and regional nuclear security frameworks. We call on countries which have
not done so to adhere to and fully implement international instruments, such as the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities as well as the Code of Conduct on the
Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources. We note with satisfaction a positive trend in
participation in those instruments.
Mr Chairman,
Lithuania would like to stress a key role that the IAEA plays in reviewing and assessing safety
and security of emerging nuclear sites as well as providing assessment of readiness of the
national nuclear infrastructure, maturity of the national regulatory system, safety culture, etc. We
encourage all States, the newcomers to the IAEA in particular, to make use of the full range of
Agency services. We also encourage other countries to perform risk and safety assessments for
nuclear power plant in operation and under constructions in cooperation with the IAEA, similar
to a review of the safety of all European Union nuclear power plants on the basis of a
comprehensive and transparent risk and safety assessment ("stress tests"). We also invite lAEA
Member States to host lRRS and other peer review missions and to conduct national reviews on
a regular basis.
Lithuania fully adheres to the principle that safety is a precondition for the responsible and
sustainable use of nuclear technology and stands ready to share our experience in the field of
nuclear safety, safeguards application, safe radioactive waste management and radiation
protection.
Mr Chairman,
Finally, we welcome the contribution of civil society in promoting the principles and objectives
of the NPT. The Preparatory Committee and the very [2015] Review Conference should
acknowledge this indispensable contribution and look for more effective interaction.
I thank you. 