Check against delivery
Statement of the Republic of Lithuania
by H. E. Ms. Raimonda Murmokaite,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Lithuania to the United Nations
At the General Debate of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Madam President,
First let me use this opportunity to convey my country's heartfelt condolences to the
Government of Nepal and its people as well as to the governments of those countries
whose citizens lost their lives during the devastating earthquake in Nepal last
weekend.
Madam President,
I congratulate you on your election as President of this Conference and wish you all
the success in your endeavors. Let me also assure you of the support of Lithuanian
delegation in this regard.
)
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made by the High Representative of the
European Union Ms. Federica Mogherini earlier this week. In addition, allow me to
make the following comments in my national capacity.
For over 45 years the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has
been the cornerstone of non-proliferation and disarmament instruments in our quest to
maintain and strengthen the international peace, security, stability and trust.
Three mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT should be promoted in a balanced
manner to further enhance credibility, integrity and enduring importance of the NPT
1 
regime. Real progress on nuclear disarmament towards total elimination of nuclear
weapons and compliance with the obligations under the NPT would undoubtedly
generate further incentives for peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to address many
challenges we face in the advancement of human and economic development needs,
such as food safety, nutrition, disease prevention, medical diagnostic and therapeutic
capacities, water resource management, and protection of environment.
As a non-nuclear weapon state, Lithuania reiterates its commitment to the goal of
general and complete disarmament and a world free of nuclear weapons. We support
global efforts working on the building blocks for achieving effective, verifiable and
irreversible nuclear disarmament. Lithuania does not share the view that creating new
structures for negotiation could help to overcome existing differences. In order to
eliminate nuclear weapons, conditions should be created to ensure regional peace,
security and trust that would render nuclear deterrence obsolete. Effective and
verifiable measures on nuclear arms reduction and control are an essential element. In
this regard we deplore the recent recurrence of nuclear arguments in political rhetoric
by one nuclear weapon state in support of its political goals.
The international community has already agreed on a number of multilateral building
blocks for achieving a world without nuclear weapons. Two next logical steps in this
direction are the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
and immediate start of the negotiations for the Treaty to Ban the Production of Fissile
Material for Nuclear Weapons or other nuclear explosive devices (FMCT).
Madam President,
In the turbulent security environment of today, proliferation challenges continue to
threaten international stability.
We note with regret that the goal of a Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems has not been reached yet. We highly commend the tireless
efforts of co-conveners and the Conference facilitator, Ambassador Laajava, to
convene the proposed Helsinki Conference at the earliest possible date.
We welcome the E3+ 3 negotiations and the prospect of a comprehensive diplomatic
solution of the Iranian nuclear issue. We call on Iran to further engage in constructive
negotiations and to fully cooperate with the IAEA regarding all outstanding issues,
2 
including those of possible military dimensions. A balanced outcome of negotiations,
once fully implemented, would serve to advance our shared goal of strengthening the
global nonproliferation regime.
Lithuania condemns the outright violations by the DPRK of its international
obligations, in particular those contained in UN Security Council Resolutions 1718,
1874,2087 and 2094. We urge the DPRK to abandon its nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles programmes and return to the NPT and IAEA Safeguards at an early date.
Madam President,
Twenty years ago Ukraine, following Belarus and Kazakhstan, joined the NPT as nonnuclear
weapon State and removed Soviet-era nuclear weapons - the third largest
arsenal in the world at the time - from its territory in exchange for security assurances.
It was a historic achievement and a huge step towards a future without nuclear
weapons.
In return, under the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, the nuclear-weapon States,
including the Russian Federation, reaffirmed their commitment to respect the
independence, sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine, to refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine, and guaranteed that none of their weapons will ever be used against Ukraine.
By illegally occupying Crimea and continuing to use a whole array of means to
destabilize eastern Ukraine, the Russian Federation has breached its obligations under
the UN Charter, the Budapest Memorandum, as well as the very foundations of the
international law. These blatant violations have serious ramifications on the NPT, as
well as the whole course of disarmament process and we condemn them in the
strongest terms. Lithuania urges the Russian Federation to respect Ukraine's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as the denuclearized status
of Crimea which it annexed illegally.
Madam President,
Lithuania remains committed to ensuring responsible development of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. The inalienable rights should go hand in hand with responsible
behaviour of State Parties in terms of abiding by their non-proliferation obligations,
recognised international standards, conventions and safeguard agreements. We believe
3 
that a key priority in this regard is the universalization of the International Atomic
Energy Agency' Additional Protocol. This, combined with the adherence to full-scope
safeguards, will provide the confidence that nuclear energy is developed in the best
non-proliferation environment.
Lithuania attaches great importance to increasing transparency and trust between and
among countries that are developing nuclear construction projects, in particular
between neighbouring countries if they may be affected by such plans. In this regard,
all nuclear power plants should meet the highest nuclear safety requirements, and fully
comply with all relevant international agreements. Any planned or existing nuclear
projects should be developed in open, transparent, and honest consultations with all
potentially affected countries and by settling constructively all trans-border issues.
Madam President,
The growing use of civil nuclear applications in the world increases the importance of
nuclear security. The international non-proliferation regime, based on the NPT
obligations, the IAEA verification and safeguards system have prevented significant
spread of nuclear weapons. Still, proliferation as well as the risk of non-state actors
getting access to nuclear materials or radioactive sources remains a serious threat to
the international security. Three Nuclear Security Summits - in Washington, Seoul
and in The Hague - laid an important framework of far-reaching initiatives that
collectively strengthen nuclear security around the globe, reduce the threat of nuclear
terrorism and secure all vulnerable nuclear material in the years to come. An inclusive
cooperation among all States, with the IAEA in the lead, will help to achieve these
goals.
Lithuania looks forward for the meaningful discussions on how to strengthen the
implementation of the NPT. The overarching goal of all Parties should be to extend
the nearly 70-year record of non-use of nuclear weapons forever.
I thank you, Madam President.
4 