1
STATEMENT BY H.E. AMBASSADOR ADNAN OTHMAN
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN VIENNA
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF
THE FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO
THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
VIENNA, AUSTRIA, 3 MAY 2017
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this First
Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the NPT.
My delegation stands ready to work with you and assure you of our support towards
achieving a successful outcome of this meeting.
2. Malaysia associates itself with the statement made by the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
3. As we embark on the journey towards the 2020 Review Conference, we should
reflect constructively on the core issues before us and move beyond the disappointing
outcome of the 2015 Review Conference. In this regard, we should seek the full
implementation of the 2010 Action Plan as well as the decisions and resolutions of the
previous Review Conferences. The many points of convergence of the 2015 Review
Conference should be a good basis to begin this new cycle. The differences on key
contentious issues should be bridged in our endeavor to achieve a successful outcome
of the forthcoming Review Conference.
4. Malaysia remains convinced that the NPT regime is the cornerstone in the pursuit
of general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. Maintaining
the integrity of the NPT is paramount to international security. In this regard, Malaysia
calls on States Parties to strengthen the Treaty and to ensure that its three pillars are
implemented in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner.
5. We also urge all States Parties, in particular Nuclear Weapon States to fulfill their
obligations in order to uphold the primacy of the Treaty. In this regard, we propose
that the Nuclear-Weapon-States submit a time-bound plan to eliminate nuclear
weapons from their military and security doctrines and policies, with a view to achieving 
2
the total elimination of such weapons. Malaysia looks forward to seeing the NuclearWeapon
States fulfill their commitments under the 2010 Action Plan.
Mr. Chairman,
6. My delegation supports the ongoing process of the United Nations Conference to
Negotiate a Legally-binding Instrument to Prohibit Nuclear Weapons, Leading towards
Their Total Elimination. The undertaking to produce this instrument is consistent with
the thrust and spirit of Article VI of the NPT. In this regard, we firmly believe that the
current NPT review cycle must recognize the complementarities and positive synergies
between the Treaty and the envisaged nuclear weapons prohibition treaty.
7. In addition, Malaysia wishes to recall that we marked the 20th anniversary of the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons in 2016. This unanimous decision rendered by the Court
clearly stipulates, and I quote, “There exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and
bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control,” end of quote.
8. On a more recent development, my delegation views with serious concern the
increasingly tense situation in the Korean Peninsula. Since withdrawing from the NPT
in 2003, the DPRK had conducted six nuclear tests, including two in 2016. These and
the DPRK’s persistence in developing its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes are
posing a grave threat to international peace and security. In this regard, Malaysia
reaffirms the importance of the universalisation of the NPT, and strongly encourages
States not yet Party to accede to the Treaty as Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States.
Mr. Chairman,
9. Malaysia believes that the strengthening of existing nuclear-weapon-free-zones
and the establishment of these zones represent a positive step in attaining the
objective of global nuclear disarmament. On the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free
Zone (SEANFWZ) Treaty, Malaysia calls on the Nuclear-Weapon-States to accede to
the Protocol. In addition, Malaysia strongly urges the concerned parties to implement
the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East and to convene a Conference on establishing
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East.
Mr. Chairman,
10. Malaysia recognises the centrality of IAEA and its invaluable contribution in
establishing and promulgating effective safeguards and verification mechanisms for
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Malaysia would like to reiterate that the safeguards
verification process should be carried out in a professional, non-discriminatory and
transparent manner. Malaysia recognises the need for the IAEA to strengthen the rules
and modalities on preserving the confidentiality of safeguards related information thus
ensuring respect for the sovereignty of State Parties.
3
11. Malaysia also wishes to reiterate that Article IV of the Treaty guarantees State
Parties with the inalienable right to development, research, production and use of
nuclear energy, as well as the right to participate to the fullest extent possible, in the
exchange of equipment, materials and technology for peaceful purposes in conformity
with the respective safeguard agreements. States Parties and the international
community as a whole must live up to their obligations to uphold the principles of
transparency and non-discrimination in the implementation of the Treaty. Selectivity
and discrimination would only serve to undermine the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
12. Malaysia remains steadfast in our commitment to fulfill our obligations under the
NPT. We look forward to participating actively in this review process towards the
attainment of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Thank you.