

Mr. President,
It gives me great pleasure to see you preside over this important Review Conference of the Treaty on the Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). In congratulating you and members of the Bureau on your elections my delegation extends to you its fullest co-operation and looks forward to working closely with you in ensuring the success of this Review Conference. 
2. My delegation associates itself with the statement by the distinguished Permanent Representative of Indonesia when he introduced the Working Paper by the Non-Aligned Movement, yesterday. 
3. Five years ago when the states parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty agreed to extend the Treaty indefinitely the nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty reaffirmed their commitment to pursue in good faith renegotiations on effective measures relating to nuclear disarmament. The agreement reached was that the indefinite extension would be integral to the determined pursuit by the Nuclear-Weapon States of systematic and progressive efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of eliminating these weapons under strict and effective international control. The indefinite extension was hailed by many as a new beginning in the serious efforts towards ridding the world of these weapons of mass destruction. However, a number of delegations, including Malaysia, had reservations about the wisdom of extending the Treaty indefinitely. Malaysia had stated then that the indefinite extension of the NPT provided the nuclear-weapon States a "carte Blanche" and that it did not serve as an incentive towards universality. Given the dismal record of nuclear disarmament during the period under review my delegation sees no reason to revise the conclusion it had made at that time. We continue to believe that by indefinitely extending the NPT the international community had lost the only leverage it had vis-a-vis the nuclear-weapon States parties. Having secured their immediate objective of extending the Treaty indefinitely they see no further incentive or compulsion to make serious efforts towards the goal of the reduction and elimination of their nuclear arsenals. Self-serving national interests of the nuclear-weapon States parties have taken control of the process at the expense of the larger interests of the international community that had placed their entire faith on the good intentions of the nuclear-weapon States. 
4. Decision 1 of the 1995 Review and Extension conference, inter-alia, requires that states parties at future review conferences "should look forward as well as back", evaluate the results of the period under review, including the implementation of undertakings by States parties to the Treaty and identify areas in which and the means through which further progress should be sought in the future. Additionally, States parties should also address specifically what might be done to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty and to achieve its universality. In other words we should, at this Review Conference, engage in an objective and candid analysis of what we had achieved or not achieved in the last five years and work out a roadmap for the next five years. 
5. An analysis of the performance of States parties during the period under review on the basis of Decision 2 of the Extension Conference pertaining to the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" would reveal more negative than positive developments. 
6. On the positive side, a number of developments ought to be applauded. The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) was a major disarmament achievement which must be recognized. While it still awaits the required number of ratifications before its entry into force, we should welcome its ratification by the Russian Duma last week as a positive contribution towards that goal. Against the Russian decision, the earlier decision by the United States Senate not to ratify the CTBT was a disappointing let down especially when the international community had looked to the United States for leadership on this important matter. It is to be hoped that the United States Senate would put matters right by ratifying the Treaty at the next opportune moment. 
7. We also welcome the achievements with respect to the START process and particularly welcome the Duma's ratification of START II in advance of this Review Conference. We look forward to the beginning of the START III process although we note the linkage being established with the ABM Treaty. Malaysia shares the concern of the NAM on the destabilizing effect of the deployment of anti-ballistic missile defence system and expresses the hope that this linkage would not complicate and delay the START III process. Indeed, in order not to cause this complication, we would urge the United States to rethink its intention to develop and deploy the said defence system. 
8. My delegation is also gratified at the positive developments in respect of nuclearweapon-free zones, specifically with the establishment of such zones in Africa, Southeast Asia, which, together with those in the South Pacific and South America, would form contiguous nuclear-weapon-free zones spanning the Southern Hemisphere. The progress in the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones is gratifying indeed and reflects positively on the continuing commitment of the non-nuclear weapon States parties to the Treaty. So far more than 100 non-nuclear-weapon States in four continents are covered under the nuclear-weapon-free-zone umbrella. There has also been encouraging progress in the creation of a Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty, and in the acceptance of the innovative concept of a single-state weapon-free zone initiated by Mongolia. Similarly, Belarus' equally innovative proposal for a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Corridor merits serious consideration as part of a global concerted effort towards nuclear disarmament. We look forward to establishment of other nuclear nuclear-weapon-free zones in other regions, including the Middle East and South Asia. 
9. However, the period under review witnessed the following negative, even, disturbing developments:
- The nuclear-weapon States failed to 'fulfil with determination" the undertakings with regard to nuclear disarmament as set out in the NPT. Contrary to what was enjoined in the Principles and Objectives, nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament were not "vigorously pursued". indeed, it was one of the low points in the nuclear disarmament process with no serious efforts being made on the multilateral disarmament track and half-hearted efforts on the bilateral track. 
- Far from attaining the universal adherence to the NPT, the period saw the emergence of two more or less declared nuclear-weapon powers in South Asia. Contrary to what was stipulated in Decision 2, no serious efforts were made to attain the objective of securing the non-States parties to accede to the Treaty "at the earliest date". While nine new States have joined the NPT-which is welcomed indeed-four continue to remain outside of the Treaty, three of which have nuclear weapons options and operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. It is regrettable that no serious efforts were made to bring them into the NPT regime in spite of our earlier proposal for a serious dialogue with these countries. In this context, I would like to reiterate our call for the establishment of a high level consultation mechanism to encourage universality. 
Far from "preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devises", as called for in Decision 2, the period under review witnessed the explosion of nuclear devices by the abovementioned non-States parties who conducted a series of tests in quick succession to attain the status of nuclear powers, thereby adding to the proliferation of these weapons, with serious implications to regional and international security. 
Contrary to the objective stipulated in the Decision, the nuclear-weapon States parties failed to "pursue in good faith" negotiations on effective measures relating to nuclear disarmament. Indeed, soon after the Review and Extension Conference, two nuclear weapons states proceeded to conduct a series of nuclear weapon tests explosions.
Also, contrary to one of the stated objectives contained in the Decision 2 document, there was no "immediate commencement and early conclusion of negotiations" on a convention "banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices". 
10. We are, therefore, of the view that the agreements made at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference have not been fully honoured. The process of nuclear disarmament these past five years has become more of a case of taking one small hesitant step forward but two steps backward. While some small progress has been achieved over the last decade in the reduction of the total number of nuclear weapons deployed by the Nuclear-Weapon-States, these states reasserted their total commitment to the dangerous and outmoded doctrine of nuclear deterrence as a cornerstone of their defence and security policies. In the mistaken belief that the possession of nuclear weapons increases their security, they continue to ignore the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) "to pursue in good faith and conclude negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament under strict and effective international control". The Conference on Disarmament continues to be in a state of limbo as demonstrated by its inability to constitute a Working Group on Nuclear Disarmament and to commence negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). New players in the deadly game of nuclear armaments have emerged, with all its ramifications to regional and global security. 
11. If anything has been affirmed these past five years it is the conviction of the nuclear-weapon States parties in the doctrine of nuclear deterrence as an essential element of their security. It is clear that while the total numbers of nuclear weapons may be reduced over time out of economic or strategic imperatives, their potency has not- hence, the importance attached by these States to making these weapons more lethal and devastating based on the philosophy that one can do more with less. Indeed, there is an alarming tendency on the part of some strategic thinkers and policy-makers in nuclearweapon circles of the desirability of relying on nuclear arsenals for an indefinite period; hence, the apparent soft-pedalling on the issue of the total elimination of nuclear weapons in some circles. Some of them are even openly suggesting that such a concept is naive and even dangerous! 
Mr. Chairman, 
12. In contemplating future steps that should be taken in fulfillment of our obligations to the NPT, it is worthwhile recalling the historic Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ). In one of the most significant and important milestones in the development of international law the Court found that the use of nuclear weapons "seems scarcely reconcilable" with the provisions of humanitarian law protecting civilians and combatants from unnecessary and indiscriminate effects of warfare, and further found that nuclear-weapon States had not demonstrated any circumstances justifying of self defence, in which a survival of a State would be at stake. Without being asked to do so, the Court also gave its opinion on the meaning of Article VI of the NPT, which calls for good faith negotiations towards nuclear disarmament. It stated in paragraph 2F of the disposition and endorsed by every judge that "there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control". 
13. On the obligation to bring to conclusion negotiations on nuclear disarmament in all its aspects, let us ponder on what the President of the World Court, Judge Mohammed Bedjaoui of Algeria--your illustrious countryman, Mr. President-had said, "With nuclear weapons, humanity is living on a kind of suspended sentence....Since Hiroshima, on the morning of 6 August 1945, fear has gradually become man's first nature. His life on earth has taken on the aspect of what the Quran calls a "long nocturnal journey," like a nightmare whose end he cannot yet foresee". He went on to say that, "...humanity is subjecting itself to a perverse and unremitting nuclear blackmail. The question is how to stop it...it is to be hoped that the international community will give the Court credit for having carried out its mission - even if its reply may seem unsatisfactory - and will endeavour as quickly as possible to correct the imperfections of an international law which is ultimately no more than the creation of the State themselves." 
14. Inspired by the ICJ Advisory Opinion, Malaysia has, since 1996 and at subsequent sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, followed up on the Opinion with a resolution in the First Committee and the General Assembly. Of the four nuclear-weapon States, only China voted in favour of operative paragraph I of the Resolution which underlined the unanimous conclusion of the ICJ while the United Kingdom had abstained. Regrettably, the other nuclear-weapon States continue to oppose it. 
Mr. Chairman, 
15. The Non-Proliferation Treaty is at the crossroads. The good-will and patience of the Non-Nuclear-Weapon-States are being put under severe strain by the lack of a demonstrable political will on the part of the nuclear-weapon states to fulfil their part of the bargain they had solemnly made. Unless there is a serious change of attitude on the part of the nuclear-weapon States, there would be the risk of serious erosion in the objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and in the Treaty itself, which would, indeed, be most regrettable. 
16. There is no dearth of ideas on how to propel the disarmament process forward such as those proposed by the Canberra Commission, the New Agenda Coalition and the Tokyo Forum, to name a few. Many of these ideas, of course, deserve serious consideration. However, if we are serious in our commitment towards nuclear disarmament in all its aspects what is really required is for us to work for a comprehensive legally binding international instrument prohibiting the development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective international control. Indeed, there is in circulation since 1997 a model Nuclear Weapons Convention which deserves the serious consideration of the international community. 
17. The problem that we face, Mr. President, is not a lack of ideas. It is lack of political will to move the process forward. This has been clearly demonstrated in the preparatory process of this Review Conference. If we wish to ensure the success of this Conference, and the NPT in the long term, all States parties, particularly the nuclear-weapon States must manifest this political will. We believe it is within their power, singly or collectively as a group, to create the conditions.-not overnight, but in the foreseeable future-for the attainment of the goal for complete nuclear disarmament. 
18. Notwithstanding its continued disappointment at the lack of concrete progress made on the implementation of the NPT following its indefinite extension, Malaysia remains committed to the Treaty and will make every effort to work towards its full realisation in concert with other States parties. We will work to ensure that this Review Conference will serve its intended purpose, namely, to strengthen the Treaty and enhance its efficacy on the basis of the universal adherence to its provisions. 
  

