Mr. President,
On Malaysia's behalf, I wish to extend our warmest congratulations to you on your election as the President of this conference. We also associate ourselves with the statements made by Indonesia on behalf of the NAM, Viet Nam on behalf of ASEAN and New Zealand on behalf of the De-Alerting Group.,
Mr. President,
Malaysia looks forward to a nuclear-weapon-free world. Achieving this, rests on the fulfillment of the basic bargain embodied in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons comprising nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this regard, we are encouraged by President Obama's speech in Prague last year, the recent signing of the New START Treaty between the Russian Federation and the US, and the recently released Nuclear Posture Review of the US, which lessen the importance of nuclear weapon in military strategy. Such positive developments provide for optimism. However, this needs to be tempered by the following concerns:
One, while developments mentioned earlier are laudable, nuclear-weapon States need to do more, leading to the total elimination of nuclear arsenals. The possession of a nuclear weapon by one country is an incentive for another to have its own;
Two, the continuing pursuit of nuclearisation programmes by a few countries and the insistence of some countries to remain outside the NPT; and
Three, the slow progress in the reductions of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons, lack of transparency, and the high alert status of nuclear weapons.
Hence, if we are to fulfill the basic nuclear bargain, we need to address the following issues:
 (i) One, is how best to promote transparency, the bedrock of trust and confidence. For this reason, it is imperative that efforts at achieving total elimination of nuclear weapons be undertaken in a balanced, transparent, and verifiable manner. The norms and principles laid down by the Final Document of the First Special Session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD-1), the consensually agreed decisions and resolutions of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and the agreements of the 2000 NPT Review Conference should serve as the basis for our common undertaking;
Two, the need to undertake incremental-comprehensive approach, which incorporates step-by-step measures within a time-bound, comprehensive plan or framework in pursuing nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation; and
Three, the creation of a clear system of incentives to ensure that all States Parties that have been complying with the full scope of IAEA safeguards and verification are given the preferential treatment in establishing and implementing programmes for peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. President,
Malaysia has and will continue to do its part to realize a nuclear-weapon-free world. Let me quote just two initiatives here. At the international level, since 1997, we have submitted a resolution to the First Committee reminding all States of the Advisory Opinion of the ICJ, which reaffirms the nuclear-weapon States' disarmament obligation under Article VI of the Treaty. Therefore, all States should fulfill this obligation by commencing multilateral negotiations leading to the conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention at the earliest possible date. In this connection, Malaysia calls on all States to undertake the preparatory process through an ad hoc working group or committees for a nuclear weapons convention.
At the national level, we have enacted a new comprehensive law on export control, known as the Strategic Trade Bill 2010. The Bill will enable Malaysia to effectively supervise and control the export, trans-shipment, transit and brokering of all strategic items as well as other activities that will or may facilitate the design, development and production of nuclear weapons and other WMD and their delivery system.
Malaysia also supports other initiatives including the establishment of a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East, in accordance with the relevant GA Resolutions and the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East.
We are firmly convinced of the dangers posed by the maintenance and deployment of nuclear weapons at high levels of readiness. In the same vein, we strongly believe that taking nuclear weapons off alert is a practical step that can be undertaken by nuclear-weapon States to reduce the risk of nuclear war, while in no way diminishing their security capabilities.
Mr. President,
We must collectively work towards a nuclear weapon free world. Thank you. 










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



