1
Please check against delivery
STATEMENT BY H.E. DATUK HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AT THEGENERAL DEBATE OF THE THIRD SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
NEW YORK, 30 APRIL 2014
Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of
this Third Preparatory Committee meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the NPT. I
look forward to working with you and wish to assure you of my support and that of my
delegation.
2. Malaysia associates itself with the statement made by Indonesia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
3. Bearing in mind that this is the last Meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the
2015 NPT Review Conference, I sincerely believe that it is important for the NPT States
Parties to reach an understanding on core issues, so that substantive discussions and
outcomes can be agreed upon for 2015 NPT Review Conference. The NPT States parties
should take the opportunity to build bridges among themselves in order tostrengthen the
Treaty's core bargains and uphold its credibility. We should be steadfast in our pursuit and
proactively work towards reinvigorating the multilateral process aimed at realizing the
disarmament and non-proliferation agenda.
4. Malaysia is relentless in its pursuit of a nuclear-weapon-free world. Despite
previous setbacks and challenges, Malaysia remains convinced that the NPT regime 
2
continuesto occupy a role of central importance in efforts to halt the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, as well as being an essential foundation for the pursuit of general andcomplete
nuclear disarmament. Maintaining NPT’s integrity is keyto international security and
safety. In this regard, Malaysia calls for the NPT State Parties to reaffirm and strengthen
the three pillars of the NPT.
5. In recent years, there have been initiatives outside the Treaty that has given
morefocus, emphasis and effort towards achieving the goals of the non-proliferation. While
Malaysia has been supportive of such initiatives, it is evident that the objectives of the
disarmament pillar of the Treaty have not been pursued with corresponding urgency,
particularly by the nuclear weapons states, whether inside or outside the NPT framework.
Next year, it will be 20 years since the infamous bargain of the 1995 NPT Review and
Extension Conference was struck among States Parties of the NPT. In 1995 the nonnuclear
weapons states had reaffirmed the decision to foreswear the development or use
of nuclear weapons, on the understanding that nuclear weapons states would accelerate
the pace of their nuclear disarmament. Sadly, while we acknowledge that some efforts
have been taken in reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons, the pace of disarmament is
crawling slow, rather than accelerated. Nuclear weapons states continue to harp the need
to accelerate non-proliferation while ignoring their obligations in accordance with the
provisions of Article VI of the Treaty. We urge the Nuclear-Weapon States to accelerate
their efforts towards achieving the objectives of the disarmament pillar. Malaysia looks
forward for the Nuclear-Weapons States to fulfil their commitments to report to this
meeting on the steps that they are undertaking towards this end, as agreed under the
2010 NPT Review Conference Action Plan.
6. During the High Level Meeting of the General Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament
held in September, the Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia stated the need of not only
conceptual change towards disarmament but also attitudinal change for the disarmament
agenda. Malaysia has always been supportive of the involvement of civil society,
academicians and think tanks in the disarmament discourse. We see the conceptual and
attitudinal change in the humanitarian discourse towards nuclear disarmament and in this
regard, Malaysia has been supportive of the approach, which continues to garner support
from many States. 
3
7. Malaysia remains firm in its conviction that nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation
are two sides of the same coin. In this regard, if the international community is
serious in wanting to curtail the proliferation of nuclear weapons, it must also be prepared
to accept the need for nuclear disarmament. Non-proliferation non-compliance only exists
when there is also disarmament non-compliance. As such, my delegation would like to
reiterate the call on all NPT States Parties to continue to ensure the implementation of the
three pillars in a balanced and non-discriminatory manner.Towards this end my delegation
is also of the view that the provisions of negative security assurances as an important and
achievable step towards nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
8. Malaysia reaffirms its full confidence in the IAEA, in discharging its duties and
responsibilities in an impartial, effective and professional manner. The IAEA should
continue its commendable work in realizing the full potential of peaceful applications of
nuclear technology for the benefit of all. Malaysia reaffirms the centrality of the Agency’s
role with regard to issues relating to nuclear safeguards and verifications. Malaysia
believes that the IAEA should be afforded the time and space to conduct such activities
within its mandate independently.
9. My delegation also wishes to reaffirm the understanding that Article IV of the Treaty
vests States Parties with the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy as well as the right to participate to the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, materials and technology for peaceful purposes, in conformity with respective
safeguard agreements. In this regard Malaysia remains concerned why States outside of
the NPT have enjoyed such rights. The international community, particularly States Parties
to the Treaty should live up to its obligations in upholding principles of transparency and
non-discrimination in the implementation of the Treaty. Selectivity and discrimination
would only serve to undermine the Treaty. 
4
Mr Chairman,
10. Malaysia believes in the strengthening of existing nuclear-weapon-free-zones and
the establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free-zones represent a positive step towards
attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament. In this regard, Malaysia remains
concerned on the danger of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East. We lament the fact
that a nuclear weapons-free-zone has yet to be established in that region. Malaysia
believes that the establishment of nuclear weapons-free-zone will enhance global and
regional peace and strengthen the WMD non-proliferation among all middle-eastern
countries. My delegation joins the call for the establishment of nuclear weapons-free-zone
in the region without delay. In this regard, Malaysia calls for the implementation of the
1995 Resolution on the Middle East and urges for the Conference on establishing a zone
free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle Eastto be convened
as soon as possible.
Mr. Chairman,
11. Malaysia will continue to table the resolution on the ICJ Advisory Opinion of the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons at the United Nations General Assembly
this year. The Advisory Opinion of the ICJ clearly stipulates that States have a legal
obligation not only to pursue in good faith, but also to bring to a conclusion, negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international
control. It is unfortunate that while this resolution continues to enjoy the support of the vast
majority, there are still some NPT State parties that abstain or vote against the resolution.
It would only cause one to question their position relating to Article VI of the Treaty.
12. In concluding, let me reiterate Malaysia’s unwavering commitments to fulfil our
obligations under the NPT. My country looks forward to participating actively in this
session, with the view to lay the foundations for a successful 2015 Review Conference
and hopefully the path for a world free from nuclearweapons.
Thank you. 