• I
Statement
By
Colonel George Jaffu
On Occasion of the 2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
New York
27 April-22 May, 2015 
Thank you Madam President,
At the outset, I would like to extend my sincere congratulations to
Your Excellency, Ambassador Taous Feroukhi on your election as
the President of the 2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference.
Over the past few years there has been a growing interest on the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, and this can be testified
by the increase of the number of states and Government and the
civil society organizations that have conducted research and
organized conferences on this theme.
All along the nuclear weapons have been looked upon from the
security doctrine perspective. With their addictive influence, we
were made to believe that nuclear weapons help stabilize the global
security. At the same time, we were made to believe that these
weapons are necessary for state security. We were made to think
that the technology that monitor and secure these weapons is free
from error and miscalculation.
The state security doctrine has over the years been overemphasized
if not exaggerated such that the conference on disarmament has
been viewed by many as a talk show, with nothing significant to
present to our people.
2jPage 
Madam President;
We are gathered here, Seventy-five (75) years after the dropping of
atomic bombs in the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. We
are aware, that after all these years; the impact of these weapons
can still be registered. We pretend to turn a deaf ear to the stories of
the Hibakusha, and continue to modernize these nuclear weapons
and put them on high alert, presenting more global threats.
The discussions that have taken place the past two years 1n the
conferences organized by the Governments of Norway, Mexico and
Austria, not mentioning other regional roundtable meetings, have
indicated that nuclear weapons and human beings can coexist. We
continue to pretend that we are not aware of the humanitarian
impact of these weapons. The state and the human being cannot be
secured by nuclear weapons, these weapons are a threat to the
same human beings we pretend to protect. It has become clear that
the only way to be assured of our security and that of our posterity
is to outlaw and eliminate the nuclear weapons.
Madam President;
We, now, have the opportunity to look again at the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. This Treaty is considered to be a landmark international
treaty whose objective among others, is to further the goal of
achieving nuclear disarmament 1n general and complete
disarmament.- It is common knowledge that the NP! represents the
only binding commitment in a multilateral treaty. to the goal of
3IPage 
disarmament by the nuclear-weapon States. We are witnesses
today, that there is no commitment to achieve the goal of complete
disarmament.
Madam President:
What we can testify of is the proliferation of the nuclear weapons
technology. We are now interested to prevent those who have
managed to secure, by whatever means, nuclear weapons
technology from building arsenals to add to the thousands of
arsenals that we are happy to be modernizing and continue to put
on high alert. The question that should guide the 2015 review
process, is whether, the NPT will lead us to the long awaited
complete disarmament. We do not need an open ended process.
The humanitarian initiative has shown that we have a legal gap that
has to be filled, and this can only be addressed by developing
another legally binding instrument to outlaw and eliminate these
weapons. Malawi, just like the African states support this position.
We need to ban nuclear weapons!!
Madam President:
Malawi, as a signatory to the Pelindaba Treaty (African Nuclear
Weapons Free Zone Treaty), our goal throughout the disarmament
discourse, is a world free of Nuclear Weapons. Malawi shall
continue to cooperate with other like-minded States and
International Actors for the achievement of this goal. This year we
wrote the Government of Austria pledging our support to the Pledge
41Page 
which the Austrian Government made at the end of the Vienna
Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons. The
government of the Republic of Malawi wishes to reiterate its
unweav1ng support towards the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons.
Madam President;
Excellences and Distinguished Delegates;
Malawi considers this review conference as the pnme time to
consider the beginning of a democratic and inclusive process to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to outlaw these weapons. We
would love a process in which no one State would stand on the way
of progress. It is our ardent hope Madam President, that by the end
of this Conference, issues of human security and elimination of this
global threat will be achieved so that a world free of nuclear
weapons is attained.
I thank you!
SI Page 