Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. Malaysia associates itself with the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Cuba on behalf of the States Parties of the Non-Aligned Movement to the NPT.
2.	Malaysia supports the objective of achieving complete and general disarmament of weapons of mass destruction, which should be accomplished under effective international controls. In this regard, Malaysia supports and calls for the universality of multilateral treaties relating to weapons of mass destruction, including the Chemical Weapons Convention, Biological Weapons Convention and the Nuclear Non-Pi'oliferation Treaty. Malaysia reaffirms the role of the NPT as one of the major cornerstones in the maintenance of international peace and security. When the NPT was opened in 1968 for signature, the world had entered into a new nuclear age. There was great promise in the potential of nuclear energy to be tapped for peaceful purposes in various areas for the betterment of humankind after the lessons leamt from the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki which demonstrated the dark potential of nuclear energy to annihilate and destroy.
3.	This session of the PrepCom is important as it represents the start of the last leg of a journey to reinvigorate the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation agenda, which will culminate in the 2010 NPT Review Conference. At this present gathering, NPT States Parties should reach out and seek understanding on core issues, so that substantive discussions and outcomes can be agreed upon for 2010. The international community can ill afford another failure like in 2005 and therefore we should agree immediately on the provisional agenda for the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
4.	NPT States Parties should endeavor to realize the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, which was what our treaty based system was originally set out to achieve. It is only through the achievement of this goal can we guarantee the collective security and survival of the human race. The destructive power of the present generation of nuclear arsenals is far superior to the ones unleashed over Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The dangers of nuclear weapons are clear, but the political will to eliminate this threat has been absent. This is evident by the long stalemate in
various disarmament forums in advancing the goal of nuclear disarmament. The vision of a world free of nuclear weapons is not a Utopian dream, achieving it is not a quixotic quest. This dream however has been waylaid by the overriding priority of some countries in the West derailing the course by focusing mainly on preventing the spread of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
5.	My delegation like others is encouraged by the pronouncement by the US, in the speech by President Obama in Prague on April 4, to rededieating its commitment to seek a world free of nuclear weapons. The positive words and sincere intentions expressed are welcomed. We hope that the change in US policy can reinvigorate discussions on the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation agenda, particularly in the lead-up to the 2010 NPT Review Conference. This long overdue call for a nuclear weapons free world resonates with the increasing demands by civil society as well as by former statesman and policy makers in the West that Nuclear Weapons States should exercise leadership and take tangible measures to achieve the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
6.	However, we should be under no illusion. The NPT is under great strain. Developing countries which have renounced nuclear weapons when they acceded to the NPT are expected to accept the privilege of the few to maintain their nuclear arsenals and to extend the protection under its umbrella to their close allies. Countries which are not governed by the rules of the NPT are rewarded with a nuclear deal. Malaysia is very disappointed that preferential treatment to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is given to States not party to the NPT. Countries which hide their nuclear arsenal and can threaten their neighbors at will are left off the hook. Malaysia is perplexed why in the West many have not been forthcoming in pressuring Israel to accede to the NPT, which has prevented the establishment of a Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons in the Middle East.
7.	These are discouraging developments and can lead the world down a dangerous path. However, despite this, the NPT continues to hold, the trajectory of widening the arc of nuclear proliferation has not come to pass. This is largely due to the unwavering commitment of Non-Nuclear Weapons States to their obligations under the NPT. This notwithstanding the discriminative measures imposed particularly on developing countries party to the NPT in their pursuit of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This runs counter to Article IV of the Treaty, which vest the Non-Nuclear Weapons States with the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy, as well as the right to participate in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and technology for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with their respective safeguards agreements.
8.	NPT States Parties must reaffirm and strengthen the three pillars of the Treaty. We should recall the grand bargain struck in which, Nuclear Weapons States will pursue nuclear disarmament, Non-Nuclear Weapons States will renounce the use of nuclear weapons, and that for Non-Nuclear Weapons States there will be guarantees of nuclear energy for peaceful use.
9.	Every year, since 1997, Malaysia submits a draft resolution to the UN First Committee reminding UN Member States of the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice
which reaffirmed that Nuclear Weapons States are obligated under Article VI of the Treaty to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of nuclear arms race at an early date and nuclear disarmament. Towards this end, all States should immediately fulfill that obligation by commencing multilateral negotiations leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and providing for their elimination.
10. It is unfortunate that while this resolution is adopted by the vast majority among developing countries, many others abstained or voted against the draft resolution, which would cause one to question their position relating to obligations under Article VI of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
1 i. Efforts towards nuclear disarmament would bolster efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear arms. Inversely, the best efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons would fail if Nuclear Weapons States do not observe their obligations under the NPT. In this regard, Malaysia strongly disagrees with the doctrine that Nuclear Weapons States could maintain nuclear weapons for deterrence purposes. Deterrence is a false premise. In their bid to achieve security at all costs, the action of Nuclear Weapons States to seek nuclear deterrence has heightened the sense of insecurity of the nuclear have-nots, which would spur them to seek their own means for deterrence, including through the development of nuclear weapons. The worse fears of the Nuclear Weapons States have become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
12.	Malaysia sincerely hopes that the spark of optimism borne from the change in the US policy can revitalize the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation debate in which NPT States Parties are engaged in at this PrepCom. As always, action speaks loudest. In this regard, Malaysia hopes to see the conclusion of an agreement between the US and Russia on a successor strategic arms reduction treaty and the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban-Treaty by the US. The US ratification of the CTBT will spur Annex II countries to accede to the CTBT. It is deeds such as these on the part of Nuclear Weapons States which will advance the process of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation; two concepts which are interrelated and mutually reinforcing.
13.	NPT States Parties must restore the credibility of the Treaty. This underscores the importance of our work. NPT States Parties must cooperate and engage in dialogue to resolve outstanding issues that stand between distant countries and split close neighbors apart. Ultimately, NPT States Parties must restore the balance inherent in the grand bargain laid out by the Treaty. In this regard, the norms and principles laid down by the Final Document of the First special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD I), the decisions and resolutions of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and the agreements of the NPT 2000 Review Conference Session should serve the basis for our common undertaking.
Mr. Chairman,
14.	On a related issue, I wish to mention that last year Malaysia joined a cross-regional initiative with Chile, New Zealand, Nigeria, Sweden and Switzerland on decreasing the
operational readiness of nuclear weapons. Our Group, the De-Alerting Group, is of the view that the maintenance and deployment of nuclear weapons at high levels of readiness are unacceptable and poses a grave danger to all. Malaysia strongly believes that taking nuclear weapons off alert is a practical and imp lenient able step that can be undertaken by Nuclear Weapon States to reduce the risk of nuclear war and that would not in any means diminish their security capabilities. While a successful conclusion of a US and Russia a successor strategic arms reduction treaty would reflect quantitative disarmament measures, de-alerting would be seen as a complementary qualitative measure. In this regard, I wish to mention that there will be a seminar on "decreasing the operational readiness of nuclear weapons" at the sideline of the PrepCom. Given the recent developments which have shone a light on advancing the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda, we hope this Seminar will draw broad participation and support.
15. In concluding Mr. Chairman, I hope we will find the political will to move forward and find ourselves able to move much closer from the elusive goal of a world free from nuclear weapons.
Thank you.