
Ladies and Gentlemen,
First, allow me to express my delegation's satisfaction for having a Representative of Peru, Latin
American country, friend and an ally of Mexico, chairing our work. You can count on the full
support of Mexico for the success of the conclusion ofthis session ofthe Preparatory Committee.
Mr. President,
We are on the final stage of the review cycle of the NPT, the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, and the only treaty on this type of weapons that has entered into force. The
next time the parties meet will be at the Review Conference, which will mark 20 years of the
indefinite extension of the NPT, 70 years since the founding of the United Nations, and in which
we will commemorate the sad 70th anniversary of the attacks to Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
We must also be aware that this session of the Preparatory Committee, is taking place in a
context of new regional tensions in different parts of the world that coexist with old crisis,
and that a few would like to see as an opportunity to justify the existence of nuclear weapons and
even argue in favor of a new era of proliferation.
Mr. President:
The Plan of Action of the 2010 Review Conference commits its parties to not adopt policies that
are contrary to the NPT (Action 1 ). The notion that the weapons of mass destruction are the basis
of international security, and that governments are infallible in creating military doctrines based
on weapon of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, is philosophically inconsistent
with the objectives ofNPT since it encourages proliferation and assumes that the threat of use of
nuclear weapons is infallible, when it is contrary to the UN Charter.
The multidimensional, comprehensive and progressive nature of human security is changing paradigms,
focus and priorities of decision-making processes and public policies in the contemporary
international community. Therefore, a global security system, effective , sustainable and indivisible
cannot be set on the accumulation of weapons of mass destruction or the threat of its
use. Nor can it be based on the sacrifice of the few for the safety of others, or that of most people 
in the world in favor of the interests of a handful of governments. The global security of the XXI
Century must be founded by international law and the unrestricted protection of human beings.
Mr. President
The NPT was created based on a balanced negotiating package, through which, on the one hand,
the non-nuclear weapon states committed ourselves not to acquire or produce such weapons and
to be verified by the international community in exchange for protection of our right to develop
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, and on the other hand, nuclear weapon States commited to
eliminating them. Therefore we should not forget that this "great bargain" was originally conceived
as a temporary and transitional arrangement towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
Indeed, we can congratulate ourselves that, most of the objectives of the Treaty on nonproliferation,
especially on horizontal non-proliferation, and protection of the right to develop
nuclear energy for peaceful uses have registered progress in their implementation. Excepting
very few and specific cases, non-nuclear weapon states have complied with our obligations under
the Treaty. Some non-nuclear weapon states, as Mexico, have even taken on additional voluntary
commitments on non-proliferation, peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear security with the
purpose of contributing to a safer world, such as our adherence to the Additional Protocol or the
incorporation to export control regimes.
Despite the progress in two of the pillars of the Treaty, the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear
weapon states to eliminate their nuclear weapons, a third pillar of the regime, is far from
being fully accomplished. The negotiations, in good faith, on effective measures relating to cessation
of the nuclear arms race, legally bound by Article VI of the Treaty, have not been held,
and certainly have not occurred "at an early date". Nor a treaty has been negotiated on general
disarmament under strict and effective international control, as is stated by article VI.
More concerning, the indefinite extension of the NPT seems to be interpreted by some countries
as a "recognition" of an alleged right to indefinitely possess nuclear weapons. Mexico strongly
rejects this notion.
In the context of our arguments before the International Court of Justice in 1995, regarding the
Advisory Opinion on the Legality ofthe Threat or Use ofNuclear Weapons, Mexico stated that
the possession of nuclear weapons by a handful of states could only be interpreted in the context
of the NPT, as a temporary situation, pending the total elimination of such weapons. Such tolerance
has never meant our acceptance of legality and legitimacy of the possession of nuclear arsenals,
and this argument is as valid today as ever.
In the sixth and final paragraph of the operative part of the Advisory Opinion, the Court concluded
unanimously that "There is an obligation to pursue in good faith and to conduct negotiations
on nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control." In
this context, Mexico remains attentive to the suit filed by Marshall Islands before the International
Court of Justice for the breach of the obligations of nuclear weapon States to conclude negotiations
on nuclear disarmament. We invite States to request the Court to participate in this
procedure. 
Mr. President,
While today there are fewer nuclear weapons than during the Cold War years and the nuclear
weapons states have greater dialogue amongst themselves, there are still 17,000 nuclear weapons
in the world in possession of a minority of states who affirm that they are necessary to guarantee
their safety and that of their allies. And in this sense, not only nuclear weapons still exist, but
most of them also are in high operational alert status and draining resources for improvement and
maintenance.
Although they have not been used since 1945, there is no guarantee that nuclear weapons will
never be used, either intentionally or accidentally. While it appears that the risk of a military conflagration
between great powers is less likely than 50 years ago, we cannot guarantee that these
weapons will not be used again. The mere existence of nuclear weapons presents incalculable
risks: the risk that a country with nuclear weapons to attack another; the risk of accidents; the
possibilities of errors of calculation are committed in times of crisis; the risk of these weapons
falling into the hands of non-state actors.
Mr. President,
Concern about the possibility of a humanitarian catastrophe caused by nuclear weapons is not a
new concept or a parallel track, but the basis for the implementation of commitments, obligations
and aspirations of all parties to the NPT, and particularly of the nuclear weapon States. Mexico
urges the parties to the NPT to ensure that the Review Conference will serve as a stage to identify
the true "distractions" that threaten the integrity ofthe regime and, more importantly, toquestion
the arguments used to justify the existence of nuclear weapons. We must not forget that the
only guarantee against the use of nuclear weapons is their total prohibition and elimination.
Pondering the humanitarian impact and the risk posed by the existence of nuclear weapons must
therefore be the impulse to revitalize the disarmament machinery, which has been paralyzed for
18 years, and to restart multilateral negotiations, as requested by Secretary-General Ban KiMoon,
to continue advancing the "international law of disarmament" , and the creation of new
international standards.
Concerns about the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons has been a recurring theme
since the catastrophe caused by the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and is incorporated in
the Preamble of the NPT and other instruments, such as the Treaty for the Prohibition ofNuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, or Treaty ofTlatelolco.
In line with this, the Plan of Action agreed at the Eighth NPT Review Conference in 2010 expressed
our "deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons." After a successful conference in Oslo, Norway in 2013 , last February, 146 countries,
8 international organizations, the International Committee ofthe Red Cross, 20 national societies
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent, 61 civil society organizations,
academia, and national and international media, gathered in Nayarit, Mexico, at the Second International
Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, to address technical 
and scientific aspects of the devastating humanitarian consequences that could arise from a new
nuclear weapon detonation.
As demonstrated through testimonies and scientific evidence, besides the irreparable loss of life,
the immense suffering of the survivors and physical devastation of infrastructure of a nuclear
detonation, and probably in an irreversibly way, to the environment and food security, and
would be a huge obstacle to the intervention of international humanitarian agencies. The damage
to the people, natural resources, their art and culture, makes a nuclear detonation a real threat to
human security, development of peoples and civilization in general.
We warmly applaud the decision of Austria to convene the Third Meeting on the Humanitarian
Impact of Nuclear Weapons by the end of this year. It is essential to continue this discussion to
document, with scientific and objective evidence, the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of
these weapons of mass destruction, and the urgent need for this concern to underpin our actions
whithin the framework of the NPT, as it was expressed in the respective group statements submitted
by Switzerland at the First Session of PrepCom in 20 12; South Africa in the Second Session
in 2013 and New Zealand in the 68 session of the UN General Assembly on behalf of 125
countries.
The interest generated by the Conference of Nayarit, and the quality and quantity of participants
is proof of the growing understanding of the international community on the need for substantial
progress to achieve and sustain a world free of nuclear weapons.
In this context , the final document of the Conference of Nayarit, presented as a report by the
Mexican Presidency (Chair's Summary), which has been submitted to the Preparatory Committee
for due consideration, reflects the opinion of the overwhelming majority of delegates, in the
sense that these discussions should lead to the commitment by States and civil society to achieve
new standards and standards through a legally binding instrument prohibiting nuclear weapons in
the same way, as in the past, the weapons that have been eliminated were first banned. From the
point of view of Mexico, the time has come to initiate a diplomatic process, to define specific
time lines and the most appropriate fora to achieve this work.
We hope that the NPT Review Conference discusses this issue in a constructive manner so it
makes the implementation of the pillars of the Treaty on which the non-proliferation and disarmament
regime is established, a reality.
Thank you Mr. President.
... - . ~ 