Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a special honor and a privilege for me to address this Conference on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Moldova. First of all, allow me, Mr. President, to join previous speakers in congratulating you on behalf of my delegation on your election to the presidency of the Seventh Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I am convinced that your recognized ability and extensive experience will enable you to lead the work of the Conference to a successful conclusion.
Mr. President,
The Republic of Moldova, along with other countries represented here today, attaches great importance to all principles and articles of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and perceives it as the cornerstone of the global nonproliferation regime and an important basis for achieving our common goal of nuclear disarmament.
The historic decision of the Fifth Review Conference in 1995 to extend indefinitely the Treaty has proved the importance that States Parties pay to the NPT as a fundamental legal norm underpinning international peace and security. The political obligation undertaken by the States Parties through the adoption during the Sixth Review Conference of the "13 practical steps" for implementing Article VI of the NPT and paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 1995 Decision on the Principles and Objectives is another eloquent demonstration of the continuous great significance of the NPT.
During the last decade, the international community has undertaken considerable steps to move forward towards achieving the goals of the NPT. The opening for signature of the CTBT in 1996 represents a commendable international consent against nuclear test explosions and a more effective obstacle to the qualitative and quantitative development of nuclear weapons. The voluntary renunciation of nuclear weapons by Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus also constitutes an important contribution to nuclear disarmament.
My country welcomes and supports the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different regions of the world, recognizing them as important complementary instruments to the NPT. We would also like to express our strong support to the commitment of the Central Asian States to create a zone free of nuclear weapons in that region.
We must foster the nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament process. Thus, we believe in the universality of the NPT and we call on all countries that haven't done so to line up to the international efforts of combating proliferation of WMD by joining the NPT as soon as possible. We also noted with regret the intention of the DPRK to leave the NPT and we call on this country to reconsider its intention to withdraw from the Treaty and begin implementing its provisions without further delay.
The Republic of Moldova is also concerned with the fact that after almost nine years since its adoption the CTBT is not yet lucrative and its spirit and objectives have been challenged. Countries whose ratification is essential should adhere to and unconditionally ratify without delay the CTBT.
The Republic of Moldova calls for overcoming the stagnation in negotiations of the relevant treaties supporting nuclear non-proliferation and for developing a more constructive approach within the Conference on Disarmament. We consider that an FMCT (Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty) will help promoting the goal of nuclear non-proliferation. This will create, in our opinion, favorable premises for a more active disarmament process, which should lead to the adoption of implementable and verifiable nuclear disarmament measures in the future.
Mr. President,
Since the proclamation of its independence, the Republic of Moldova has strongly supported the principles of nuclear non-proliferation. By our accession in 1994 to the NPT and subsequent conclusion of a comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and our signing of the CTBT in 1997 my country has constantly shown its commitment to strengthen the international nuclear non-proliferation legal system.
Also, the Republic of Moldova undertakes ail necessary measures, including creation of a respective legislative basis, to prevent possible transfers through its territory of any components, materials and technology related to weapons of mass destruction especially through developing cooperation with other states.
Moreover, the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is an integral part of the Action Plan signed by the Republic of Moldova and the European Union in February 2005. The parties engage to cooperate on non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including on aspects related to accession to and implementation of relevant international instruments in the light of EU WMD Strategy and export control regimes and establish an effective system of national export control overseeing the export and transit of WMD related goods, including WMD end use control on dual use technologies.
We also welcome the additional efforts undertaken by the States Parties to promote combating the proliferation of nuclear weapons and impel nuclear disarmament. In this regard, the Republic of Moldova is committed to the goals and spirit of the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, initiated by G-8 leaders at the June 2002 Kananaskis Summit and of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) launched by the President of the United States of America in Krakow two years ago.
Distinguished audience,
During the period that followed the previous NPT Review Conference in 2000 the international community has faced terrible events that have irreversibly changed our society. The tragic terrorist attacks that struck United States of America on 9/11, Spain in March 2004 and the Russian Federation in September 2004 determined us to concentrate all our efforts in combating the access of non-state actors to weapons and military technologies.
This is a sensitive issue for the Republic of Moldova due to the presence on its territory of a mafia-type separatist regime controlled from outside. One of the main sources of its existence is the illegal production of and trade with arms and ammunition. The proliferation of weapons, their "marketing" to other conflict zones represents an alarm for the whole region. The weapons produced in the transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova end up in Abkhazia, Georgia and intelligence sources point out that a number of arms produced in the separatist region of Moldova were used in active combat in Chechnya, Russia.
Since there is no constitutional control over the transnistrian region of my country and over a considerable segment of the border with Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova cannot ensure an appropriate control of the access to nuclear technologies, materials and their proliferation by the illegal separatist regime which tightly cooperates with other separatist entities.
My country has emphasized on many occasions that foreign military presence is a factor which impedes the settlement process and destabilizes the security in the region. The transnistrian regime feels at safe under the shield of Russian military presence in Moldova. The huge amount of weapons and ammunition stockpiled in the transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova represents a serious concern for my Government. Nobody really knows what exactly is being stored there, since no international inspection of these depots has been carried out. We do not rule out the possibilities of weapons proliferation from the separatist regime to various terrorist organizations. There have been reports on the disappearance of two nuclear explosion imitators and several so-called "nuclear suitcases". In this context we consider it as imperative to conduct an international assessment mission of these depots in order to have a clear picture of the arsenal stockpiled there.
It is also in this context that we call on the Russian Federation to complete without delay the withdrawal of its troops and military equipment from the territory of Moldova in compliance with its 1999 OSCE Istanbul Summit commitments.
Mr. President
This conference represents another important opportunity for the States Parties, including the Republic of Moldova, to reaffirm the commitment to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which represents a solid international consensus on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. From this stand point, Mr. President, my delegation is ready to bring its contribution to achieving the aims of this Conference.
Thank You, Mr. President
