
Mr. President,
It gives me a pleasure, on behalf of the Government of Mongolia, to join the previous speakers in extending the warmest congratulations to you on the assumption of the Presidency of the Review Conference and to pledge our delegation's full support and cooperation in the discharge of your important duties. My delegation's congratulations also go to other members of the Bureau. 
Mr. President,
The very philosophy of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation is to curb nuclear weapons proliferation with the ultimate goal of securing complete nuclear disarmament. Though the Treaty was signed in 1968 and entered into force in 1970, the world has not been freed of this most dangerous type of weapon of mass destruction. Not only vertical proliferation has not been checked, but also today the threat of horizontal proliferation is real. The world is still heavily loaded with nuclear weapons, as has been pointed out by the Secretary-General in his statement addressed to the Conference. Furthermore, the international community is witnessing not only reaffirmation of existing but also emergence of new nuclear deterrence doctrines and strategies that do not exclude the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons under certain circumstances. Such approaches run counter to the letter and the spirit of the Treaty as well as to the genuine aspiration of the international community in general.
In the past two days in this Hall almost every delegation has been rightly referring to the additional challenges to the Treaty that emerged since the 1995 NPT Review Conference, including the nuclear tests in South Asia, delay of the entry into force of the CTBT, threats to the ABM Treaty that could eventually result in a renewed nuclear arms race, stalemate on the FMCT, etc.
Notwithstanding the above, my delegation fully subscribes to your view on the need to "avoid yielding to pessimism" which would only lead to stalemate. These days all of us are witnessing the display of political win and unequivocal determination of the States parties to NPT to fully implement its provisions thereby to strengthen non-proliferation and promote nuclear disarmament. Let us work in the coming weeks on the basis of this will and in the spirit and letter of NPT.
Mongolia duly appreciates the positive trends that have emerged in the field of nuclear disarmament as a result of unilateral, bilateral and multilateral disarmament efforts by the States parties to NPT. These positive trends include reduction of non-strategic nuclear arsenals by the two nuclear weapon States that possess the largest stockpiles of such weapons, signing by them of bilateral nuclear arms limitation and reduction agreements as well as their agreement in principle to make further reductions. The positive developments also include the 1996 ICJ Advisory opinion on the illegality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, the adoption and signing of the CTBT by the overwhelming majority of the international community and its ratification by 55 States, including Mongolia and the 1995 agreement by the international community to indefinitely extend the Treaty and strengthen thus the non-proliferation regime and the review process.
We also welcome as a promising omen the recent ratification by the Russian Duma of the CTBT and START II treaties. Mongolia also joins other States in congratulating Andorra, Angola, Brazil, Comoros, Chile, Djibouti, Oman, United Arab Emirates and Vanuatu that have acceded to the NPT since the last Review Conference, contributing thus to its universality. 
Mr. President,
Mongolia attaches great importance to the historic 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference decisions and the associated resolution that established substantive guidelines and indicative targets designed to promote greater accountability regarding the full implementation of the Treaty. It is, therefore, our belief that this Conference should further strengthen those decisions.
The 1995 Decision 2 on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" set out seven key areas and established a set of parameters for the evaluation of the implementation and operation of the Treaty. These are: non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament, security assurances, nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZ), universality, safeguards and peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Mongolia's general approach to these issues are reflected in the documents of the Non-Aligned countries, including in the Final Document of the recent Ministerial Conference held in Cartagena, Colombia. Nevertheless, I would like to briefly touch upon those which seem to us to be essential for attaining the objectives of the Treaty.
First. Non-Proliferation and Disarmament. These two ultimate goals, the cornerstone of Treaty obligations, must be strictly implemented by the States parties to the NPT in full compliance with its Articles I, II and Vl. 
In this context, while welcoming the Russian Federation's decision to ratify the CTBT and START II, we urge the United States to respond by ratifying the CTBT. With regard to START II, we call upon Russia and the United States to start considering to fully implement it and to embark upon negotiations on START III as a next step to further cut the nuclear arsenal. At that stage the other three nuclear-weapon States should join them to negotiate gradual reduction and ultimate elimination of all nuclear weapons. We also believe that it is vitally important to secure the earliest entry into force of the CTBT and to revitalize the FMCT negotiations. It is our strong belief that these two treaties are the heart of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Second. Security assurances. There is a strong need for credible security assurances to be provided to the non-nuclear weapon States that have to be provided in a form of a legally binding international instrument. These assurances would be instrumental for strengthening and implementing the provisions of the Treaty. Therefore, like others, we urge the Conference on Disarmament to redouble its efforts in that regard.
Third. Universality. The NPT, with no time limit, is a permanent tenet of international law. Therefore, to be effective, it must be universal. My delegation fully shares the view that no country should remain outside the Treaty. Therefore we urge India, Pakistan, Israel and Cuba to join the Treaty as soon as possible.
Fourth. Safeguards. Like others, Mongolia strongly advocates and supports the strengthened Safeguards system of the international Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). in this context, we express our support for the Additional Protocol which is designed to improve and strengthen lAEA's inspections and to extend its access rights. Mongolia is working with the IAEA to conclude an additional protocol to its safeguards agreement. A group of Mongolian experts is to visit the IAEA Headquarters soon to develop further our cooperation. 
My Government is also working to conclude with the Preparatory Commission of the CTBTO an agreement on formalizing Mongolia's participation in the international Monitoring System.
Fifth. Nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZ). Mongolia attaches great importance to the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones, which are rightly considered as an important and valuable component to non-proliferation. It is in this context that my country welcomes the adoption by the UNDC of principles and guidelines on the establishment of NWFZs, which would, in our view, further consolidate the existing zones and facilitate the establishment of new ones. 
Mr. President,
Mongolia participated in the 1995 NPT Review Conference having declared in 1992 its territory a non-nuclear zone, thus going beyond non-proliferation. It has unequivocally declared that it would not allow stationing of nuclear weapons or parts thereof on its territory at any time.
Today, we are participating in this Conference with internationally supported nuclear-weapon-free status, as reflected in UN General Assembly resolution 53/77D entitled "Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status", adopted in December, 1998. Though Mongolia's ease is considered as a unique one, nevertheless we believe that it demonstrates that non-proliferation can be strengthened if unilateral action of a State is supported by the immediate neighbors and the international community, and is properly institutionalized.
To clearly define and institutionalize the status, our Parliament last February has adopted a special legislation on Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status, institutionalizing it at the national level. We believe that though modest, it is a practical contribution to international efforts to promote and strengthen the objectives of nuclear non-proliferation. The adoption of the national legislation has been welcomed and supported by the Secretary-General as well as by the Non-Aligned Movement at its recent ministerial meeting in Cartagena, Columbia. 
Mr. President,
It has been recognized that Mongolia has nuclear-weapon-free status, i.e. a status of a single and vulnerable State, would be more credible and effective if its broader security concerns are properly addressed. Together with some United Nations bodies, Mongolia is exploring ways to address some broader issues.
The nuclear-weapon States have played an important role in negotiating and the adoption of UNGA resolution mentioned above. We believe and expect that the PS would continue playing a positive role in institutionalizing our status internationally, bearing in mind Mongolia's unique case. Clearly defined and internationally recognized status would be Mongolia's practical contribution to promoting the noble goal of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. 
Mr. President,
Finally, allow me to express the hope that the Conference will be able to agree on realistic and important measures and to assure you once again of my delegation's full cooperation in your efforts to bring the work of the Conference to a successful conclusion. 

Thank you, Mr. President.

