It is a pleasure, on behalf of the Government of Mongolia, to join the previous speakers in extending the warmest congratulations to you on the assumption of the Presidency of the Review Conference and to pledge our delegation's full support and cooperation in the discharge of your important duties. My delegation's congratulations also go to other members of the Bureau.
My delegation fully associates itself with the Statement made by H.E. Mr. Hamid Syed Albar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia on behalf of the Group of Non- Aligned States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. President,
This year the international community is marking the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War and birth of the United Nations. There is also another anniversary - a sobering reminder of the tragedy of the people of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The horror and devastation brought by nuclear weapons 60 years ago should never be allowed to happen again.
The Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is the most important legally binding instrument available to the international community to curb proliferation of nuclear weapons, seek to achieve the ultimate goal of their elimination, and save the future generations from nuclear apocalypse. Since its establishment the Treaty has neither dwindled nor diminished, but only gained in its paramount significance as the cornerstone of global non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament regime. Attaining absolute universality of the NPT remains crucial to the global non-proliferation regime and we welcome the accession of Cuba and Timor-Leste. In the same vein, my delegation once again calls upon India, Israel and Pakistan to join the Treaty as non-nuclear states at an early date.
With an almost universal participation, that is second only to the Charter of the United Nations among international instruments dealing with issues of international peace and security, the history of the NPT is one of success and wisdom. As the Secretary General has rightly pointed out, the Treaty in 35 years of its existence "has proved indispensable: it has not only diminished nuclear peril but has also demonstrated the value of multilateral agreements in safeguarding international peace and security'. No one would argue that the world with the NPT is far better than one without.
Mongolia along with many other countries places equal emphasis on the 3 pillars of the NPT - non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament, and the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
It is regrettable that the 13 practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the NPT agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference are still yet to be fully implemented. This Review Conference provides a welcome opportunity to inject new energy to the efforts of the international community to ensure that progress is made on these and other decisions of the previous review conferences.
In this regard, my delegation once again reiterates its strong support to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the importance of its early entry- into-force and universality. Establishment of a global legal norm banning all nuclear explosions in all environments, regardless of their nature and objectives, along with an effective verification and monitoring regime will have a two- pronged effect. First, it would constrain development and qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons, thus preventing their vertical proliferation; second, the CTBT once in force would deny possible proliferators a possibility to actually complete their nuclear weapons programs, thus checking horizontal proliferation. Mongolia calls on the States that have not signed and/or ratified the Treaty, in particular the 11 remaining States listed in Annex II, to ratify it as soon as possible.
Negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices are long overdue. My delegation is of the view that that scope of application of such a treaty should include the preexisting stocks. We also regret the fact that a resolution that had traditionally been adopted by consensus in the First Committee of the General Assembly was adopted by vote during the 59th session.
Multilateral nuclear disarmament action is complemented by unilateral, bilateral and plurilateral measures in this field. In this context, Mongolia welcomed the commitment that the United States and Russia made in Moscow in the 2002 Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty to significantly reduce their strategic nuclear warheads in coming years. Mongolia echoes the Secretary General Kofi Annan's words urging the two parties concerned to pursue "arms control agreements that entail not just dismantlement but irreversibility".
Mr. President,
Mongolia fully concurs with previous speakers in pointing out to the manifold challenges that the global non-proliferation regime is facing. The ownership and control of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems used to be confined to states; however, alarmingly, there is a new trend of non-state actors with access to sophisticated weapons, an interest in acquiring WMD and the clear intent to use them.
Mongolia, like other states, was alarmed at the revelation of the A.Q. Khan's clandestine proliferation network. Even though A.Q. Khan traded with states, one could easily imagine a nightmare scenario of how such proliferation activities could be exploited by terrorist groups and the catastrophic results thereof. In our world of interconnected threats and increasing globalization such a worrying revelation would cause security, economic and financial shockwaves that would affect the lives of people in every corner of the world.
At	this critical juncture a number of international initiatives aimed at addressing and reversing this dangerous trend have been taken, most notably the UNSC resolution 1540 (2004) adopted unanimously under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. It was decided that all States should refrain from supporting by any means non-State actors that attempt to acquire, use or transfer nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their delivery systems. The resolution also called on States to establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation of such weapons and means of delivery, in particular for terrorist purposes, including by establishing appropriate controls over related materials, and adopt legislative measures in that respect.
Mongolia welcomes the fact that the General Assembly was finally able to adopt by consensus the international convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. It is my sincere wish that the convention shall enter into force in a most expedient manner.
Mr. President,
The	credibility of various non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament treaties depend to a great extent on the effectiveness of their verification regime. Proof of compliance with a treaty regime is imperative if one is to enjoy fully different privileges and rights conferred by the relevant legal instruments, and the NPT is no exception. Mongolia reaffirms its commitment to International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)'s comprehensive safeguards system and Additional Protocols thereto. My country has ratified its Additional Protocol to the IAEA Safeguards Agreement in 2003 and has been vocal in its support to their universal application ever since, so that combinations of a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and Additional Protocol would be adopted as a standard norm for international verification of peaceful nuclear activities.
Mongolia underscores the inalienable right of non-nuclear-weapon States that have fully complied with their obligations under the NPT to participate in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Nuclear-weapon-free	zones are a crucial element of global non-proliferation regime and an important confidence-building measure in various regions and beyond. Mongolia has been consistent in its support to the existing NWFZs under the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, and Pelindaba, and to establishment of new NWFZs including those in Central Asia, Middle East, South Asia, Korean Peninsula and the Southern Hemisphere.
My Government highly commends the Government of Mexico for its timely initiative to organize the Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that established Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zones. The conference was organized last week in the same historic hall in Mexico City where the Treaty of Tlatelolco was established 38 years ago, and it proved to be a huge success. My country had the distinct honour of taking part in the conference as a full participant.
19.ln the Mexico Declaration, the States parties and signatories to the Treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok, and Pelindaba, and my own country - in total over 100 states - expressed their "recognition and full support of Mongolia's international nuclear-weapon-free status". The outcome of the Conference has also been welcomed by the Non-Aligned Movement. Such recognition of Mongolia's international nuclear-weapon-free status by the overwhelming majority of world nations is of paramount importance in light of relentless efforts exerted by successive governments of Mongolia over the course of more than 10 years towards institutionalizing our status as the international level. Indeed, ours is a unique initiative of only state in the world that has no other neighbor but two of the nuclear weapon States, to achieve an international legally-binding nuclear-weapon-free status, and let me say, it is well on track.
20. My country's position on the DPRK's nuclear issue is well known. Mongolia is a vocal advocate of a nuclear-weapon-free Korean Peninsula. Therefore, we strongly support the multilateral process aimed at resolving the issue peacefully through dialogue, engagement and negotiations.
Mr. President,
This	Review Conference offers us a welcome opportunity to reiterate NPT's continuing authority, integrity and effectiveness, and to make recommendations outlining global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament strategy for the coming years. It is my fervent hope that our deliberations over the next four weeks will produce concrete results. I would hope that States Parties will make every effort to engage in open and constructive dialogue to bridge the gap existing between their positions for the common good. Let me repeat here the words of H.E. Mr. Dermot Ahern, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ireland, saying that "we need to listen; to recognize the legitimate concerns of others and to seriously engage in addressing those concerns".
Finally, allow me to assure you once again of my delegation's full cooperation in your efforts to bring the work of the Conference to a successful conclusion.
I thank you.
