
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates,
Like many previous speakers, my delegation agrees that this prepcom is meeting at a time when, as the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out in his statement earlier this morning, after experiencing a disarmament depression the world today seems to be emerging from that low point. Mongolia believes that the positive signs and trends that are emerging create a favorable atmosphere to pursue more vigorously the goals of a world free from nuclear weapons.
Mongolia aligns itself with the statement of the Non-Aligned Movement. As requested by you, Mr. President, my delegation will not reiterate its principled positions on the major issues on prepcoma€™s agenda, but would rather, in its national capacity, give a brief up-date on two items relevant to the issues under consideration.
One. I would like to take this opportunity to brief this committee on the first meeting of focal points of NWFZs and Mongolia held last week (on 27-28 April ) in Ulaanbatar, Mongolia. The meeting discussed the issues connected with implementation of the 2005 Tlatelolco Declaration adopted at the first Conference of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that establish NWFZs, preparations for the second conference and for the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
The meeting was attended by states representing the Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Central Asian NWFZ treaties and Mongolia. Representatives of Egypt, Turkey as well as of PNND, CTBTO, Mayors of Peace, Blue Banner and some other NGOs participated as observers. The participants of the meeting stressed the importance of universalization of the NPT and the speediest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty. The meeting was updated on recent developments concerning the issues of establishing NWFZs in the Middle-East, North-East Asia and some other regions of the world. Participants were also briefed on the developments regarding the Nuclear Weapons Convention and the Hiroshima-Nagasaki Mayors proposal for the protocol to the NPT banning nuclear weapons.
The meeting decided that Mongolia as organizer and Chair of the Ulaanbaatar meeting would present the common stand to this prepcom on some of the issues under consideration. Though my delegation would have the chance to brief in some detail on the outcome of the meeting when the relevant issues are considered under cluster II, I would like to briefly highlight the following points:
The participants reaffirmed the validity of the Tlatelolco Declaration and reaffirmed that the existence of nuclear weapons and the possibility of their use constituted a threat to the entire humankind, and that their use would have catastrophic consequences for it. They expressed support for the Secretary-Generala€™s five point proposal to revitalize the international disarmament agenda that would include a call for negotiations on effective measures leading to nuclear disarmament.
The meeting welcomed the entry into force of the Central Asian NWFZ and the imminent entry into force of the African zone. It noted the possibility of requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a second comprehensive report on NWFZs in all their aspects because 34 years have passed since the first report. Much has changed since then and a comprehensive, forward looking report based on the past vast experience would be practically useful to promote confidence, strengthen regional peace, nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
Two. With respect to Mongolia's continuing efforts to institutionalize its nuclear-weapon-free status, regarding which this delegation had the honor to present a working paper at the second prepcom, I would like to inform that Mongolia and its two neighbors a€" Russia and China a€" have met in Geneva last March to discuss a draft trilateral treaty prepared by Mongolia that addresses the external aspects of its status. Substance-wise the draft closely follows the NWFZ treaties but at the same time reflects the specific location of Mongolia and its relations with the two neighbors. The Geneva meeting was held in a frank and business-like atmosphere. The sides were able to exchange views on some aspects of the draft treaty. They agreed to continue the talks.
Mongolia, like the States Parties to or Signatories of NWFZ treaties, stands ready to work closely with other states in making the prepcom and the 2010 NPT revcon an important milestone in strengthening the non-proliferation regime and moving towards a world free of the threat of nuclear weapons.
Thank you.