PERMANENT MISSION OF
MONGOLIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
VIENNA
Fasangartengasse 45, 1130 Vienna, Austria
Tel.: +43-1-5352807. Fax: +43-1-5352807-20
Web. w.ernbassymon.at, Email: office@embassymon.at
Statement by Amb. J. Enkhsaikhan of Mongolia in the general debate
of the first PrepCom for 201 5 NPT Review conference
May 2,2012 Vienna, VIC
At the outset allow me to congratulate you, Amb. Woolcott, on your election as the
Chair of this session of the PrepCom. Bearing in mind your vast experience my delegation has
no doubt that you will be able to steer the session to a successful conclusion.
The NPT is the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Here in
Vienna we are embarking upon a new NPT review cycle following a successful 2010 Review
conference and adoption of a balanced and forward looking 64-point Action Plan. My
delegation totally agrees with the High Commissioner for Disarmament Affairs when she said
that the NPT without a review process would be but an empty shell without any effective
means of maintaining genuine accountability for the fulfillment of commitments and legal
obligations of the Treaty.
Almost two years after the 2010 conference, the time has come now to take first stock
of what has so far been achieved in implementing the agreed Action Plan, and, more
important, what needs to be done and how to implement most effectively the agreements
reached.
My delegation believes that though some concrete actions have been undertaken to
which many previous speakers have justly the made reference, still much more needs to be
done, whether in diminishing the role and significance of nuclear weapons in military
concepts and doctrines or accelerating the entry into force of the CTBT, starting the long
sought FMCT negotiations or the process of establishing a zone free of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. With respect to the latter, my delegation
joins the others in welcoming Finland's decision to host that conference at the end of this year
and for appointing Mr.Jaako Laajeva as it facilitator. His efforts and mission will be
successful only with full cooperation of the countries of the region and the major actors. My
delegation wishes every success in his important and highly delicate mission.
Due to lack of time and since specific issues would be addressed later in greater detail,
allow me in this general debate to touch upon an issue of great importance to all the
participants, i.e. the issue of nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs). The states parties to these
zones last Friday held their first preparatory meeting for their 2015 Third conference of
nuclear-weapon-free zones and Mongolia (NWFZM). Having served as the chair of that
preparatory meeting I would like to briefly inform the delegates about it, which was attended
by representatives of over 50 countries. 
The meeting was opened by the Chair of the Second NWFZM conference held in 201 0 in
New York. It was addressed by UN High Representative for Disarmament, representatives of the
IAEA, CTBTO, OPANAL and of the James Martin Center for Non-Proliferation Studies. Focal
points of NWFZs. some states parties to zone treaties and representative of Mongolia's nuclearweapon-free
status made statements that focused on different issues of implementing the NWFZ
treaties, the decisions of the Second NWFZM conference and the challenges that still lay ahead.
They underlined the importance of the early preparations for the Third NWFZM Conference as
well as of making a concrete input to the work of this and subsequent preparatory committee
sessions leading to yet another productive NPT Review conference in 201 5. Special political
importance was given to a successful convening of the conference on the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction. It was
announced that Indonesia had agreed to chair the Third NWFZM conference in 2015.
The meeting also heard statements by observers from nuclear-weapon states, namely the
U.S., France, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom, underlining the importance that
nuclear-weapon states attach to the issues pertaining to NWFZs.
The Mongolian delegation, as a contribution to promoting the goals of NWFZs proposed
to ask the Secretary General of the United Nations to undertake a comprehensive study of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in all their aspects and report to member states by 2014 in advance of
the third conference. The first and only such a study had been made as far back as in 1975, i.e. 37
years ago.
The third issue that my delegation would like to briefly touch upon is Mongolia's
nuclear-weapon-free status, which this year marks its twentieth anniversary. For two decades
Mongolia has been working to have that status formally recognized and institutionalized. Today
the initiative enjoys a wide international support, as reflected in numerous United Nations
General Assembly resolutions and other international documents. Though we are not yet there,
our consistent, or should I say persistent, policy and the results achieved so far demonstrate that
all nations, including individual small states, can make concrete contribution towards the
common goal of promoting a safer world.
At present Mongolia is consulting with the P5 regarding the content and format of the
assurance that it believes is needed to finally institutionalize the status. The uniqueness of the
case resides in the fact that Mongolia cannot be part of any traditional (i.e. regional) NWFZ.
Hence this unique case needs equally unique approach. The assurance that Mongolia is seeking,
bearing in mind that it is located between two nuclear-weapon states only, is to have the P5
formally recognize its status and commit not to contribute to any act that would violate that
status. Thus the vast Mongolian territory, an area of 1.5 mln. square kms, will be off limits to
nuclear weapons as long as such weapons exist. That would be our practical contribution to
predictability and stability in the region. 
On the margins of this prepcom session Mongolia shall be meeting with the P5 on this
issue. It appreciates the P5 engagement on this issue and expresses the hope that the renewed
spirit of understanding would soon lead to its recognition of the status by the P5 and its formal
institutionalization.
Allow me to end this statement with the best wishes of my delegation for a successful
session. Thank you. 