Mr. President
We meet today, in New York, in crucial circumstances for the future of the international nuclear regime and for the enhancement of global security. We seek to renew our collective commitment to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by implementing its provisions in order to adjust it to meet the challenges facing the international community.
To achieve this objective, Your presidency is of particular importance to this Conference, which requires concerted efforts of all participating delegations. You can thus count on our delegation's strong support and genuine commitment for the success of this important responsibility you are entrusted with.
Mr. President
The NPT constitutes an important asset which allowed the international community to lay - forty years ago - the foundations of a multilateral nuclear consensus, based on a delicate balance between the three pillars of the Treaty, in order to maintain international peace and security.
The Treaty has faced significant challenges during the last ten years, which has jeopardized the consensus built upon it and opened the door to some illegitimate aspirations. However, a renewed interest in issues of nuclear disarmament, namely President Obama's landmark speech in Prague, followed by the signing of the START II treaty and the Washington Nuclear Security Summit held last month, in addition to the launch of several international initiatives on non- proliferation, has created a favourable climate to reinvigorate the international nuclear system.
In keeping with the vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, based on a balance between the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the obligation of a responsible and transparent use of this technology, the Kingdom of Morocco believes that the State parties to the NPT should be called upon to objectively take stock of the implementation of the Treaty and to revive the spirit of collective ownership of its noble objectives. This requires that we avoid divisions on the basis of difference in interpreting its provisions. We equally need to overcome the implications of a chronic misunderstanding between nuclear weapons States and non-nuclear weapon States.
Accordingly, all State parties have to demonstrate good faith and a spirit of responsibility, by adopting a gradual strategy based on strengthening national efforts and activating relevant bilateral and international agreements in order to achieve the objective of nuclear disarmament in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the NPT.Mr. President,
Disarmament should not be perceived as a concession, but rather as an effective and a necessary contribution to a world free of nuclear weapons and to strengthen international peace and security.
While welcoming positive developments in nuclear disarmament, Morocco calls for the fulfillment, in a balanced and transparent manner, of the obligations deriving from the NPT and agreed upon in the review conferences. My country also underlines the need to reinvigorate the work of the Conference on Disarmament for an effective and progressive implementation of the 13 steps adopted by the 2000 review conference.
The Moroccan delegation looks forward, in this regard, to an early negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty and hopes that concrete steps will be taken towards the adoption of international Conventions on Disarmament and Negative security assurances.
As a coordinator with France on the implementation of the Final declaration of the Article XIV conference, held last year in New York, Morocco reiterates its call for practical measures to ensure an early entry into force of the Complete Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. Morocco calls on countries listed in Annex II to ratify, without delay, this Treaty, which is of a crucial importance to disarmament and non-proliferation
Mr. President,
Establishing nuclear weapons free zones (NWFZ) in Africa, Latin America, Southeast and Central Asia has strengthened the NPT capacity in preventing nuclear weapons proliferation and a nuclear arms race. In this context, Morocco welcomes the entry into force of NWFZ in Africa and expresses its hope to achieve the objective of this treaty.
In the same vein, it should be recalled that the indefinite extension of the Treaty was agreed upon in 1995 on the basis of a decision to establish a NWFZ in the Middle-East. This decision gave an impetus to all Arab countries to adhere to this Treaty. It is, however, regrettable that 15 years later, the international community has not yet been able to implement the Middle-East decision.
Morocco believes it is necessary to undertake effective and practical measures to free the Middle East from nuclear weapons as an important step towards building confidence between the countries of the region and in strengthening international peace and security.Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Morocco underlines the importance for all State parties to comply with their Non-proliferation obligations and calls upon the international community to adopt a policy of Zero tolerance for attempts to violate the Treaty. Furthermore, Morocco emphasizes the importance of strengthening the safeguards regime of the IAEA, taking into consideration the important role of the Additional Protocol.
Morocco remains convinced that the ability to respond to the challenges posed to the NPT requires enhanced efforts to strengthen its effectiveness and uphold its credibility. In this spirit, Morocco is of the view that initiatives launched recently are complementary to the Non-proliferation regime as they namely enhance international cooperation and exchange of experiences.
In addition, and in light of the increasing importance of nuclear security, particularly due to the threat of nuclear terrorism, the Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the successful outcome of the Washington Summit which adopted practical measures to boost international cooperation aiming at securing and protecting nuclear materials to prevent any destructive misuse.
Mr. President,
Access to energy has become a strategic stake, thanks to the role it plays, now more than ever, as a key driving force for sustainable development. Thus, world energy needs, which have been increasing steadily, but in an imbalanced manner, in different regions and countries, are expected to witness a growth of about 50%. Forecasts also show that it would be impossible to rely entirely on fossil energy resources due to the environmental impact and the insufficient reserves.
This confirms the vital importance of alternate energy sources such as Nuclear energy, which also provides solutions in various sectors including health, Industry, Water management and Agriculture.
In this context, Morocco reiterates the necessity of respecting the inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy as enshrined in Article IV of the NPT, in full conformity with safeguards obligations. Moreover, Morocco remains convinced that the safe, transparent and responsible use of nuclear energy will undeniably contribute to social and economic development.
The Moroccan delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the efforts of the IAEA in the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy for sustainable development and calls for providing the Agency with sufficient resources to allow it to continue supporting nuclear programs of its Member States in accordance with the noble objective of Atoms for Peace.
The Kingdom of Morocco remains firmly convinced that enhancing the nonproliferation regime should not raise additional obstacles to the promotion of international cooperation and technology transfer for peaceful purposes. In this spirit, Morocco actively contributes to the international dialogue on the multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycles, and welcomes proposals which aim at facilitating and organizing access to energy, bearing in mind that these should not be used as means for pressure or for hampering nuclear technology transfer for peaceful purposes.
Keeping this in mind, Morocco calls for setting up an international coalition to enhance the contribution of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in realizing the objectives of economic and social development. To this end, it should be possible to build on the results of the Paris International Conference on Access to Civil Nuclear Energy (March 2010) and the Nuclear Energy Global Partnership.
Mr. President,
The world in which we are living, and that of the future generations, are undoubtedly different from the era during which the NPT was adopted. We should admit this evident reality in order to do away with the ways of thinking that were prevailing in the past century and to review our methods when dealing with the nuclear issue.
Our conference is thus called upon to show a spirit of innovation and objectivity while reviewing the provisions of the Treaty and considering all issues before us, namely; disarmament, non-proliferation, peaceful uses, the central role of the IAEA and the enhancement of its resources, the legal issue of withdrawal from the Treaty, in addition to the challenges that were not on the agenda- like nuclear terrorism- during the adoption of the NPT.










1/ PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4

1/ PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3





Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



