STATEMENT BY H.E. MS. SABINE BOHLKE-MOLLER, PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVEOF NAMIBIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN GENEVA, DURING
THE GENERAL DEBATE ON THE SECOND PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
(PREPCOM) FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON NONPROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)
Mr. Chairman,
I wish to congratulate you on your assumption as Chairperson of the second session
of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the State Parties of
the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT). I also congratulate other members of the
Bureau on their election, and commend your predecessor H.E Ambassador Henk Cor
Van der Kwasi of the Netherlands, for his hard work as Chair of the 2017 PrepCom.
My delegation aligns itself with the Statement delivered by the Non-Aligned
Movement and the African Group.
Mr. Chairman,
The Three Pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing and are essential instruments
to strengthening international peace and security. Namibia wishes to stress that
nuclear disarmament should remain a priority on the Agenda of this PrepCom. We
once again renew our strong call upon the nuclear weapons states to fully comply
with their legal obligations and unequivocal undertakings to accomplish the total
elimination of nuclear weapons without further delay, in a transparent, irreversible
and international verifiable manner.
The failure to reach consensus on the final document at the 9th NPT Review
Conference, is a reminder to all of us to redouble our efforts and to reaffirm our
strong commitment to the Treaty in order achieve a successful 2020 Review
Conference.
Namibia remains a committed State Party to the African Nuclear Weapons FreeZone
Treaty (Pelindada Treaty), which provides a shield for Africa by preventing the
stationing of nuclear explosive devices on the continent and prohibiting testing of
those destructive weapons on the continent.
In the same vein, Namibia joins those who are calling for the establishment of a
nuclear weapon -free-zone in the Middle East, and expresses concern over the fact
the consensus reached at the 2010 NPT Review Conference regarding the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East, have not been implemented.
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is essential in curbing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and advancing the goal of nuclear disarmament.
Namibia therefore believes that it is important to strive for the early entry into force
of the CTBT, in order further strengthen the verification regime, which will
significantly contribute to the enhancement of International Peace and Security. We
therefore call upon the Annex II States to sign and ratify the CTBT without further
delay.
Mr. Chairman,
We reaffirm that Nuclear Disarmament is highest priority, and remain concerned at
the threat to humanity posed by the continued existence of nuclear weapons and of
their possible testing, use or threat of use. The situation in the realm of nuclear
disarmament continuesto be characterized by impasse, as Nuclear-Weapons States
have not made progress in eliminating nuclear weapons.
Any use of nuclear weapons is in violation of the UN Charter and a crime against
humanity. The total elimination of nuclear weapons and the assurance that they will
never be produced again is the only unqualified assurance against the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences arising from the use of such weapons.
We reiterate the need for all States to comply with international law applicable in
this area, including international humanitarian law. Measures and initiatives taken
should be within the framework of international law and should contribute to the
promotion of international peace and security.
We continue to express our deep concern over the lack of progress in the
implementation of nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments by the
Nuclear Weapons States. We once again call them to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals, in accordance with their relevant obligations
under the NPT.
Namibia welcomesthe historic adoption ofthe Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons, on 7 July 2017. It is our considered view that the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons will not undermine the NPT, but will rather
complement and strengthen it. Being mindful of the humanitarian consequences of
the use of nuclear weapons, we believe that full implementation of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is imperative to the guarantee against the use of
nuclear weapons also by ensuring their total elimination. Namibia has signed the
important Treatyand isin the process offinalizing its ratification.
We also with to underscore the importance of the peaceful application of nuclear
technology for sustainable development, and stress that the technical cooperation and
assistance provided by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in meeting
the needs of its Member States in pursue technology for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy shall not be subjected to any conditions that are not compatible to the
IAEA Statute.
Namibia further wishesto reiterate itssupportforthe Joint Plan ofAction (JCPOA),
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the E3/EU+3. We call upon the parties to
this agreement to honour their responsibility by abiding to the latter and spirit of
the JCPOA.
Finally, we wish to highlight that multilateral disarmament negotiations will achieve
tangible results if and when we can generate the necessary political will to support
the process.