Draft
Check against delivery
Statement by the delegation of Nepal at the General Debate of the
second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 23 April 2018
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, let me congratulate you on your election to the chair of
the second session of the Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Nuclear NonPro1
iferation Treaty.
W c trust this Session will lead to an action-oriented review process
under your constructive leadership.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT constitutes the cornerstone of global nuclear nonproliferation
regime as well as the essential foundation for the pursuit
of nuclear disannament. However, five decades down the road after
the adoption of NPT, our dream to live in nuclear free world still
remains unfulfilled.
As we move towards the 10th comprehensive review, we underscore
that the process should take a holistic look into its three interlinked 
and mutually reinforcing pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, and develop a
robust regime that ensures full safety and security in the uses of
nuclear technology to benefit mankind.
The consensus document containing an action plan that resulted from
the 2010 NPT Review Conference regenerated hope and positive
spirit for global disarmament and non-proliferation. We must build
further on these positive developments.
We would like to underscore the importance and urgency of renewed
political will and flexibility to be displayed by all States Parties to
achieve a successful conclusion of the 2020 review process. We
should look at the level of progress achieved at the first PrepCom in
2017 and redouble our efforts towards this end.
It is heartening that a legally binding instrument in the form of a
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons could be adopted in
July last year. It reaffirmed that any use of nuclear weapons would
also be abhorrent to the principles of humanity and the dictates of
public conscience.
Nepal believes that timely ratification of the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons and its early coming into force would generate a
momentum conducive towards total elimination of nuclear weapons.
We also stand for an early conclusion of the Fissile Materials Cut-Off
Treaty (FMCT).
2 
Taking good instance of the signing of the landmark Treaty, there is a
need to move forward with the same spirit and commitment during
the upcoming review conference. We should be careful not to allow
the failure of last review conference to cast a shadow upon our work.
We also believe that significant step towards fulfilling the longstanding
commitment of the international community to eliminate the
weapons of mass destruction begins with entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).
Mr. Chairman,
As the host to the Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament for the
Asia-Pacific, Nepal believes that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free-zones
could serve as building blocks towards complete
disarmament at the global level.
Effective implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East
would be a significant step towards promotion of peace and stability
in the region and universal adherence to the NPT.
Nepal believes in and consistently advocates for general and complete
disarmament of all weapons of mass destruction including chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons in a time-bound manner.
Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the provisions of
the effective, universal, unconditional , non-discriminatory and
irrevocable negative security assurances should be guaranteed by
nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States. Nepa l
strongly opposes the weaponization of outer space and reaffirms that
3 
outer space should be used for the betterment of the global
community.
Article TV of the NPT provides all States with the inalienable right to
develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination.
Nepal believes that peaceful use of nuclear technology with strict
adherence to the JAEA safeguards and verification regimes benefits
the entire humanity. In this respect, sharing of knowledge and
cooperation with the developing countries on nuclear technology for
scientific, humanitarian and development purposes must be enhanced
to ensure equitable benefit for all.
We note with grave concern the increasingly extensive investment by
countries on modernization of nuclear forces and development of
more dangerous and devastating nuclear warheads.
We are concerned that the risk of a nuclear weapon explosion is
significantly increasing with increased proliferation, the lowering of
the technical threshold for nuclear weapons capability, and the danger
of terrorist groups gaining access to nuclear weapons and related
materials. We strongly call for putting an immediate stop to this trend.
Mr. Chairman,
Maintenance of international peace and security cannot be assured
through thoughtless allocation of resources to armaments or
modernization of nuclear weapons. Rather, we can assure security and
prosperity for all by diverting the human and economic resources,
4 
including technological solution towards the fulfilment of sustai nable
dev elopment goals that our leader s agreed in 2015.
Nep al firmly uphold s the conviction that in the interest of the very
survival of humanity, nuclear weapons must never be used again,
und er any circumstances. As the preamble of the NPT clearly outlines,
the proliferation of nuclear weapons serious ly enhances the danger of
a nuclear war. In such situation, both the nuclear 'haves' or 'havenots'
would be me ted out the same fate. Nuclear weapons cannot
serv e any genuine security intere sts as these are mutually destructive.
It goes without saying that stockpiles of nuclear weapons do not
provide any sense of security , but create situations of fear, mistrust
and hostility. Total comp liance with NPT is critical to ass uring
collective security of humankind.
In this spirit of our principled stand, Nepal is pleased to j oin tly submit,
at the current session, a working paper highlighting the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons.
I would like to reiterate our willingness to activ ely pursue the goals of
peac e and security, prosperity and common good with the reali zation
of a world free of nucl ear weapons.
I thank you.
5 
