Please check against delivery
Statement by H. E. Mr. Shanker D. Bairagi, Ambassador/Permanent
Representative of Nepal to the United Nations Office and Other International
Organizations in Geneva, at the Second Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, General Debate, Geneva, 23 April
2013
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, on your assumption of
the chair of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review
Conference. While assuring you of the full cooperation of my delegation in the
discharge of your tasks ahead, I believe that the committee would be able to achieve
success under your able guidance.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT constitutes the cornerstone of global nuclear non-proliferation regime. As we
are moving towards the comprehensive review of the NPT, the process should take a
holistic approach to look into its three interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars:
disarmament, non-proliferation and development of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. Evidently, any selective approach in pursuing these objectives would
undermine the spirit of the NPT regime. The universality of the Treaty would be the key
to its success.
The consensus document containing an action plan that came out of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference has regenerated hope for global disarmament and non-proliferation.
Implementation of the action plan is critical to enhance trust and confidence. There is a
need to move forward with the same spirit during the upcoming review conference and
beyond. We believe that the first session of the Preparatory Committee held in Vienna
last year has laid a solid foundation in this direction. Meaningful contribution and
constructive engagement of States would generate much needed trust for the success
of the review process.
Mr. Chairman,
Nepal believes in and consistently advocates for general and complete disarmament of
all weapons of mass destruction including biological, chemical, nuclear, radiological
weapons in a time-bound manner. Such weapons provide no effective guarantee to
security in an interconnected and interdependent world where the definition of security
can no longer be confined to the traditional notion of military security alone. Not only
for the maintenance of international peace and security, disarmament assumes vital
role in opening vistas for channelling scarce resources for more humane purposes
including the eradication of poverty and hunger and uplifting the standard of living of
1 
the poorer segments of the population throughout the world through enhanced
economic and development activities.
We believe that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones in all regions could
serve as building blocks towards the complete disarmament at the global level, and the
full implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East would be a significant
step towards non-proliferation. However, such initiatives should not be seen as a
substitute for nuclear disarmament and total elimination of nuclear weapons. The
fulfilment of the obligations under the treaty remains as critical as ever.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation firmly believes that pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the
provision of the effective, universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory and irrevocable
negative security assurances by nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon
States through a legally binding instrument is a must.
Article IV of the Treaty guarantees the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to
develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination. However, adherence to the legal obligations and the effective
supervision and verification of the IAEA are must in such process. Technology must
always be used for the benefit and wellbeing of mankind, but not for their destruction
or that of the civilization. Nuclear safety and security is of paramount importance. My
delegation equally holds the view that the degree of nuclear knowledge sharing and
cooperation with the developing countries on nuclear technology for scientific,
humanitarian and development purposes must enhance to ensure equitable benefit of
the technology for all.
Nepal believes in multilateralism and multilaterally agreed solutions to global problems.
We want to see the observance of the immediate, unconditional and permanent ban on
nuclear weapon testing and closure of all nuclear weapon test sites. We also believe
that the fissile-material cut-off treaty, which aims to address the proliferation of fissile
material, would be of vital significance to attain nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, while reaffirming Nepal's deep commitment to nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, I would like to reiterate our willingness to actively pursue these goals
collectively with other member States during this session of the Preparatory Committee
and beyond.
Thank you. 