1
g]kfn
NEPAL
Statement by H. E. Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai, Ambassador/Permanent
Representative of Nepal to the United Nations, at the Third Session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, General Debate, New York, 30 April 2014
Mr. Chairman,
I join the preceding speakers in congratulating you on your election to the chair of the
Third and final Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I am confident that,
with your wisdom and experience, you will be able to steer us through this session of
the Committee to a fruitful conclusion and pledge my delegation's full cooperation in the
discharge of your demanding duties to that end. We appreciate the commendable work
done by the Chair of the second session, Ambassador Cornel Feruta of Romania.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the distinguished Foreign
Minister of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT constitutes the cornerstone of global nuclear non-proliferation regime as well
as the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. More than four
decades after the entry into force of NPT in 1970, our dream to live in nuclear free world
still remains unfulfilled. As we are moving towards the comprehensive review of the
NPT, the process should take a holistic approach to look into its three interlinked and
mutually reinforcing pillars: disarmament, non-proliferation and development of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes.
The consensus document containing an action plan that came out of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference has had regenerated hope and positive spirit for global
disarmament and non-proliferation. Since implementation of this action plan is critical to
enhance trust and confidence, there is a need to move forward with the same spirit
during the upcoming review conference and beyond.
Mr. Chairman,
Nepal believes in and consistently advocates for general and complete disarmament of
all weapons of mass destruction including biological, chemical, nuclear, and radiological
weapons in a time-bound manner. Such weapons provide no effective guarantee to
security in an interconnected and interdependent world where the definition of security
can no longer be confined to the traditional notion of military security alone. 
2
Nepal strongly opposes the weaponization of outer space and believes that the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free-zones in all regions could serve as building
blocks towards complete disarmament at the global level, and that the full
implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East would be a significant step
towards non-proliferation. However, such initiatives should not be seen as a substitute
for nuclear disarmament and total elimination of nuclear weapons. The fulfilment of the
obligations under the Treaty remains as critical as ever.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation believes that only the total elimination of nuclear weapons can provide
absolute guarantees against the use of it. Pending the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, the provisions of the effective, universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory
and irrevocable negative security assurances should be guaranteed by nuclear-weapon
States to the non-nuclear-weapon States.
As per Article IV of the Treaty, all states have the inalienable right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. But
at the same time, the primary responsibility of nuclear safety and nuclear security rests
with the nuclear states. As nuclear safety and security is of paramount importance, the
International Atomic Energy Agency can play a central role in facilitating effective
implementation of safeguards standards. My delegation holds the view that the degree
of nuclear knowledge sharing and cooperation with the developing countries on nuclear
technology for scientific, humanitarian and development purposes must be enhanced to
ensure equitable benefit of the technology for all.
Nepal believes in multilateralism and multilaterally agreed solutions to global problems.
We want to see the observance of the immediate, unconditional and permanent ban on
nuclear weapon testing and closure of all nuclear weapon test sites. We stand for early
conclusion of Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
Nepal believes that the high-level participation and strong expression of support for the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons during the first ever High-level Meeting of the
United Nations General Assembly on nuclear disarmament on 26 September 2013 is a
step forward towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Nepal supports efforts
and initiatives from any and all quarters to that end.
To conclude, while reaffirming Nepal’s deep commitment to nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation, I would like to reiterate our willingness to actively pursue these goals
collectively with other member States during this session of the Preparatory Committee
and beyond.
Thank you.
 