
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
I hope you will forgive me for starting by congratulating my colleague Ambassador Henk Cor van der
Kwast on his election as Chairman. It is good to know that this meeting is in your experienced hands,
and I wish you the best of luck. The Netherlands’ delegation, of course, fully supports you.
I would like to raise a not wholly unimportant question: why are we here?
This PrepCom comes at a challenging time. We face international tensions that affect the functioning
of the NPT. And all this after the previous RevCon failed to reach consensus on a Final Document,
depriving us of some much-needed direction. We have to overcome a lack of progress on
disarmament. Complicating matters, there exist significant differences of opinion on what such
progress should look like.
Thus, it is time we have a serious talk on where we stand and how we can move forward.
Mr. Chairman,
Admittedly, “we need to talk” is not usually a phrase that has very positive connotations. But I take
heart in the fact that the NPT arose from the need to overcome a challenge and we have been able to
overcome challenges throughout its decades of being in force.
We do this because we have common goals and principles. Nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy are not zero sum: they benefit us all, Moreover, the NPT
review cycle is an inclusive process. It provides a platform for discussion, based on binding legal rules,
for 191 states. This builds confidence between them.
• For example, the NPT has provided the framework for a diplomatic resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue. This PrepCom should give a strong signal of support for the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and reflect the need for those involved to continue
working toward its implementation.
• At the same time, the DPRK has rejected the NPT and everything that it stands for, leading to
a major nuclear crisis on the peninsula. Make no mistake: this is a grave challenge to the non
proliferation regime. We strongly condemn the actions of the DPRK and urge the PrepCom to
send a clear, unified message that this is unacceptable based on the norms of the NPT.
• “We need to talk” also applies to disarmament. Where are we now? More importantly, where
do we want to go? What does a nuclear weapon free world look like? The review cycle for the
NPT, the only instrument obliging its nuclear-armed members to disarm, is the right venue for
this discussion. We must try to elaborate what this goal looks like, what we need to achieve it,
and where the gaps in our knowledge or capabilities lie. And yes, this includes a discussion on
the role of a nuclear weapons ban.
I urge everyone here to keep an open mind on these and other issues. On many, we will have to
conclude that we must agree to disagree at this point. That does not mean there is no use in engaging
in dialogue. An exchange of viewpoints, with a readiness to listen to others, is always a first step in
finding compromises. This PrepCom must be that first step, along the way to 2020.
Mr. Chairman,
I started out by asking the question: Why are we here? Clearly, introspection and stock-taking are
part of that answer. But the issues at hand are mportant enough to warrant more ambition than just
that.
waiting
We have all heard we ‘should not leave everything until the last moment’. In this case, that means not
with moving forward until the Review Conference, Instead, where possible, we should all right
here and right now be as forward-looking as we can. We must identify positive developments and
areas where our positions converge. Then we must discuss how we can build on these for further
progress. As these important questions will be discussed more detailed in the clusters, let me mention
here just a few significant examples to illustrate how progress may advance.
The first one is nuclear disarmament verification. Let us be realistic: states are not going to
disarm completely unless they know others are doing so as well. If we want a world without
nuclear weapons, we need an ironclad verification mechanism, that at the same time prevents
the transfer of proliferation-sensitive weapons-related information. Right now such a
mechanism — or the necessary technology — does not exist. That is why we must move
forward with initiatives such as the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
• Another
Verification
example
(IPNDV)’
relates
and
to
the
a Fissile
upcoming
Material
Group
Cutoff
of Governmental
Treaty
Experts. 2
(FMCT) 3,something we have long
been striving for, Banning the production of tissue matertals for military purposes would cap
nuclear arsenals and help put a lid on nuclear arms races. The new high-level process that has
been initiated presents an opportunity to make further progress on elements of a treaty to
feed into negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament (CD).
• We should also talk about peaceful uses. If the location of this PrepCom did not already
remind us of the importance of peaceful nuclear cooperation, the excellent speech by Mr.
Amano certainly did. Nuclear energy, in the context of both power and non-power
applications, has many benefits for mankind. We must see how such cooperation can further
be stimulated.
• We could also make progress in terms of transparency and reporting. We have to build on
what we started in the last review cycle. Nuclear weapon states sharing information about
their nuclear arsenals and doctrines creates dialogue, both amongst themselves and with NPT
non-nuclear weapon states. It increases predictability and therefore stability. This way,
increased transparency will help build confidence, trust and can be a stepping stone for further
progress on disarmament.
• Finally, we could improve our own working methods. It has often been pointed out that the
NPT review cycle may not be the most efficient mechanism since the dawn of multilateralism.
We have, on previous occasions, talked about how to remedy this, and we should continue to
do so in this review cycle.
To conclude, Mr. Chairman,
We are here because the NPT stands for multilateralism,
and challenges.
for finding joint solutions to shared problems
stability and
Its objectives are universal. So is the imperative to maintain international peace,
through working
security, to prevent the threat or use of nuclear weapons. We achieve these goals
nuclear weapons,
towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, preventing the spread of
fully into account
and fostering the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We do this taking
imperatives.
security-related considerations, but let ourselves also be guided by humanitarian
positions
We are here because we must address the challenges before us, taking into account our different
is of the greatest
on how to
importance
handle them. As our Minister pointed out at the CD last February, multilateralism
So will our opinions
in relation to disarmament. Priorities of NPT member states may differ.
and honest dialogue.
on how to effectively implement the NPT, But moving ahead starts with an open
And
of a regime,
we are here because it is crucial that the NPT keeps moving forward. The NPT is the cornerstone
and relax, because
the legal
we
foundation
would
of a process, that keeps developing and evolving. We cannot sit back
new momentum. This
drift from our goals. After 2015, and events since then, the NPT needs
PrepCom is the place to start building it.
Thank you.
