Statement by Ambassador Paul van den IJssel
Head of delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
the 1st Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review
conference
General Debate
Check against delivery 
Mr. Chairman,
Allow me to join others in congratulating you on your election as chair of this
PrepCom and assure you of our full support. The Netherlands fully associates itself
with the Statement by the European Union as well as to the statement by Turkey
on behalf of the NPDI.
Mr. Chairman,
Disarmament
Disarmament and Arms reduction (actions 1, 3, 4, 5)
While the nuclear weapon states should take the lead in the process of
disarmament and arms reduction we, the non-nuclear-weapon states, also have an
important contribution to make.
The Netherlands has always advocated a phased step-by-step approach to
disarmament and has contributed actively to all multilateral processes in order to
take further steps towards achieving a world without nuclear weapons.
With regard to action 4 we welcome the entry into force of the new START treaty
between the United States and the Russian Federation. The Netherlands would
encourage the United States and the Russian Federation to work towards further
comprehensive reductions on all categories of their nuclear arsenal.
Transparency and irreversibility (actions 2, 29, 20, 22)
Increased transparency, irreversibility and verifiability are essential for sustainable
disarmament. Also here non-nuclear-weapon states have a role to play. The
Netherlands, together with other countries of the NPDI, has contributed to the
implementation of action 21 by proposing a draft standard nuclear disarmament
reporting form.
We are convinced that increased transparency of nuclear-weapons-related data is
essential to achieve more progress in nuclear disarmament and its verification. We
encourage NWS to continue to work towards greater transparency and we look
forward to a continued dialogue on this issue.
Conference on Disarmament (actions 6, 7, 25)
The Netherlands continues to be very worried about the continued stalemate in the
CD and the lack of implementation of actions 6, 7 and 15. The credibility and
legitimacy of the CD as a body for multilateral disarmament negotiations, is at
stake.
Last year's session of the General Assembly demonstrated the growing concern of
many delegations about the state of the multilateral disarmament machinery, and
the CD in particular. Resolution A/RES/66/66, which The Netherlands tabled
together with South-Africa and Switzerland and that was adopted by consensus,
clearly states that the General Assembly is ready to further explore options for 
multilateral negotiations, if the CD is again unable to adopt and implement a
programme of work this year.
Fissile Material (actions 16, 1 7, 18)
The fact that the CD is in a stalemate and negotiations on an FMCT have not yet
started should not prevent any of us to take further steps in the implementation of
actions 16/17 and 18 related to fissile material.
To contribute to preparations for eventual FMCT-negotiations the Netherlands will
organise together with Germany two expert side events on FMCT.
CTBT (actions 10, 11, 12, 13, 14)
Pursuant to action 13 the Netherlands is committed to universalizing the CTBT and
promoting its early entry-into-force. We recognize the security and civil benefits of
the CTBT verification system, including the International Monitoring System and
feel that the scope for expanding civilian use of the Monitoring System in other
areas of early warning and emergency response should be explored. We will
continue to utilize diplomatic opportunities to urge states to sign and ratify the
CTBT.
Non-Proliferation & Disarmament Education (action 22)
The Netherlands believes that the continued involvement of a broad well-informed
civil and academic society is essential in order to strengthen the non-proliferation
regime, spur arms control efforts and enable long term disarmament commitments.
For us these are not just words. We have included in our delegation 2 PHD
students, who by their presence at this conference get a firsthand impression of our
work and of the NPT Review Cycle. Let us hope this impression is a positive one.
Nuclear Non-Proliferation (Actions 23 to 46)
Today, the proliferation of nuclear weapons is one of the gravest threats to
international peace and stability. I am thinking in particular of Iran and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Compliance (Actions 26 and 27)
Iran needs to restore international confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
activities. We need transparency about the full extent of its nuclear programme - especially of its programme's possible military dimensions. Iran needs to meet its
international obligations, as laid down in several IAEA Board of Governors and UN
Security Council Resolutions.
We strongly condemn the recent missile launch by the DPRK, which constitutes a
clear violation of that country's international obligations. These and other activities
are of grave concern. We urge the DPRK to return to the six-party talks and to
accept IAEA safeguards for all its nuclear facilities.
Verification and safeguards (actions 28 and 29) 
The Netherlands has had a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement with an
Additional Protocol in force for many years. For the Netherlands this represents the
current verification standard. In order to obtain an environment conducive to
cooperation, a framework of confidence is needed. As The Netherlands applies the
most stringent safeguards measures in its nuclear installations, we expect no less
of others.
We are therefore actively promoting the universalization of the AP. We have just
finalized an extra-budgetary grant to the IAEA off 100.000 to assist the Agency in
its efforts in this regard. Furthermore, through our Safeguards Support Programme
we have among others contributed to ECAS and the development of Novel
Technologies. We will continue to do so.
Export Controls (Actions 35, 36 and 37)
Nuclear export controls are a legitimate, necessary and desirable means of
implementing States' Party obligations under Article I11 and States' Party rights
under article IV of the Treaty. The Netherlands is committed to uphold the highest
standards of export controls and committed to full transparency in that field. As
Chair of the Nuclear Suppliers Group the Netherlands has carried numerous
outreach activities to promote its guidelines and understandings.
Nuclear Security (Actions 40, 41, 42, 44 and 45)
Furthermore, nuclear terrorism is a real threat with grave consequences. We must
do everything in our power to make sure terrorists never get their hands
on nuclear material. This is a fundamental objective of Dutch foreign policy. In
meeting this challenge, international cooperation is vital. The Netherlands is fully
committed to the implementation of the Communiqu6s and Work Plan and of the
Washington and Seoul Nuclear Security Summits. These give an impulse to the
actions of the 2010 NPT Review Conference and to the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan.
We are therefore honoured to host the next Summit in the Netherlands in 2014.
In accordance with Action 42, the Netherlands in 2011 ratified the amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and it calls on those
States that have not yet done so to ratify as soon as possible. Similarly, we are
implementing Action 61 by working towards the elimination of the use of HEUtargets
in the production of medical isotopes - HEU fuel has already been
eliminated. At the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul, we have pledged that this
process should be finished in 2015.
Peaceful Uses
The Netherlands fully recognizes the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
(Art IV), in conformity with articles I, I1 and I11 of the Treaty. Further views are set
out in the conference paper submitted by the Vienna Group of 10 (Working paper 2
of the PrepCom). I will not repeat those views here, but I will focus on the Dutch
implementation of the actions of the RevCon 2010.
IAEA TC (action 52 - 54)
Central to the promotion of peaceful uses is the Technical Cooperation programme
of the IAEA. We have worked towards strengthening the programme, including 
through increases in efficiency and effectiveness. We commend the Agency for its
important work on nuclear energy, cancer treatment, water management,
agriculture and other areas. We cooperate with the Agency in the implementation of
TC, This includes training and technology transfer to scientists from IAEA Member
States by the Reactor Institute Delft which is an IAEA Collaborating Centre. The
Reactor Institute Delft also houses the Dutch National Center for Radiation
Protection which provides a broad spectrum of radiation safety courses.
Bilateral efforts (actions 48-51)
In addition we have engaged in bilateral cooperation in different ways. We work
with others to secure the worldwide supply of medical isotopes - of which the
Netherlands currently produces 40%. And as another example: we are providing an
accelerator to Ghana and have provided the relevant training to Ghana.
Safety
We are party to the safety conventions and a civil liability regime as called for in
Actions 59 and 63. Events following the tsunami in Japan in March 2011 have
shown that strong universal implementation of the safety conventions and
continuous improvements are essential.
Mr. Chairman,
Non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control have always been and will remain
cornerstones of Dutch foreign policy, with the Non-Proliferation Treaty as our
foundation and the Action Plan as our roadmap. This is an essential part of our
commitment to strengthen international law and security. For us, non-proliferation,
arms control and disarmament are facets of the same diamond. The Netherlands
will continue to make innovative, practical proposals to implement the 2010 Action
Plan. 