NEWZEALAND
Statement by
H.E. Dell Higgie
Ambassador for Disarmament and Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the Conference on Disarmament, Geneva
at the
2ndPreparatory Committee of 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
Geneva, 23 April 2018
Page 2 of 4
Mr Chair,
Allow me to convey NewZealand's congratulations to you,
Ambassador Bugajski, on your leadership of this second Preparatory
Committee (Prepcom) for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We welcome
your work to date, and are particularly pleased that you have
continued the pattern of extensive outreach which was set last year
by your predecessor from The Netherlands. We are confident that
the Asia/Pacific consultation on the Treaty held recently in Jakarta
will have played its part in laying the foundation for constructive
engagement here at this Prepcom.
For almost 5 decades now, the NPT has been the central element in
New Zealand's international obligations relating to nuclear
weapons. Over this period we have also signed on to other
obligations in this context - most notably pursuant to our regional
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (the Treaty of Rarotonga) and the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty as well as undertakings in
relation, for example, to our membership of the Nuclear Suppliers
Group.
The confidence and sense of security provided by internationallyagreed
rules is particularly valuable in times of heightened strategic
tension. At such a time, the framework of international law, in
particular International Humanitarian Law, gives vital reassurance
that important constraints exist on the conduct and use of force by
states, Undoubtedly, the international community is fortunate to
have in place rules and undertakings regarding the most destructive
of all weapon systems - nuclear weapons.
Page 3 of 4
Last year, as part of our support for a rules-based international order
and consistent with our long-standing commitment to nuclear
disarmament, New Zealand lent its support to efforts to put in place
a further international agreement in this field - the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in order to supplement efforts
within the NPT community to give reality to the obligation regarding
nuclear disarmament under Article Vl of the NPT.
Such new obligations do not - and cannot as a matter of international
law - in any way displace the full span of obligations we already owe
to all States Parties under the NPT. New Zealand will continue, as we
have for nigh-on 50 years, to fully abide by these (at the same time as
we maintain our legitimate expectation that all other Parties will
meet theirs, including with respect to Article Vl).
Clearly, International Humanitarian Law rules are of greatest value
when the global community can have confidence that they will be
complied with. Right now, however, there are a number of issues of
considerable concern in this regard. Non-compliance with IHL
obligations and norms is evident including in terms of chemical
weapons usage in the war zone of Syria as well as outside any
situation of conflict in Malaysia and the UK. We strongly condemn
any use of chemical weapons and those responsible must be held to
account. Another major challenge in recent years has been North
Korea's violation of the norm against nuclear testing. In this context,
however, we are pleased to note that there do appear to be
promising developments; we particularly welcome news of the
upcoming inter-Korea summit later this month April and the
subsequent US-North Korea summit.
Page 4 of 4
At the same time, in the rather more workaday context of this
preparatory process here, we must not overlook the fact that there
are further efforts we can make to enhance the compliance and nonproliferation
aspects of the NPT including in order to strengthen and
universalise comprehensive safeguards and safety and security
mechanisms, as well as in support of the key role of export control
regimes.
There is also considerable work required in order to implement
Article Vl and the undertakings the Nuclear Weapon States have
made over a number of Review Conference outcomes in relation to
that provision of the Treaty. The Working Paper presented to this
Prepcom by the New Agenda Coalition (WP NPT/CONF.2020/WP13)
has set out for ease of reference the full span of these commitments
many of which remain unfulfilled. Our Working Paper records our
expectation that the obligations assumed in the Treaty relating to
nuclear disarmament will be fulfilled with the same rigour which the
international community is right to insist on in relation to all other
IHL rules and undertakings.
To conclude, Mr Chair, I note that New Zealand associates itself with
the statements and ambitions expressed here by all the various
groupings to which we belong not just the New Agenda Coalition
but also the De-alerting Group and the Vienna Group of 10. We will
amplify today's General Statement with more detailed remarks which
we will deliver during the subsequent cluster debate. We would also
draw attention to NewZealand's national report, which has been
submitted as document NPT/CONF.2020/PC.11/6.