NEW ZEALAND
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF
THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENERAL DEBATE
STATEMENT BY H.E. DELL HlGGlE
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN GENEVA
30 April 2012
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
Mr Chairman
It is a pleasure to see Australia - a fellow Antipodean - in the chair for this important
meeting. In true ANZAC spirit, you can be assured of the support of the
New Zealand delegation as you guide us in our work over these two weeks.
New Zealand is pleased to associate itself with the statement which will be delivered
by South Africa on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition, and with the statement by
Australia on behalf of the Vienna Group of 10.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand welcomed the outcome of the 2010 Review Conference. The
agreement in the 2010 Action Plan represented a valuable recognition by all the
States parties that there is much to be gained from a collective strengthening of the
implementation of the NPT. Whether the 2010 Action Plan does indeed work to do
this, however, will depend on our collective efforts to implement it in this current
review cycle.
The Action Plan provides us with a reference by which we can measure our
collective efforts to implement the Treaty. This Preparatory Committee is the first
opportunity to begin to do so, and to chart further the necessary implementation
activities which will lay the basis for a successful Review Conference in 201 5.
Mr Chairman
We must collectively insist upon the fulfilment of all elements of the Action Plan, by
all States parties, across all three pillars of the Treaty. This must be our goal if we
are to avoid the disappointment that followed the unrealised commitments and
expectations arising from the 1995 and 2000 outcomes.
A key aspect of the 1995 outcome was the Resolution on the Middle East. The lack
of progress in implementing that Resolution has been of significant concern to the
States of the region and beyond. New Zealand, like others, welcomes the steps that
have been taken towards realising the actions contained in the 2010 Action Plan for
a process leading to the full implementation of the 1995 Resolution. We do not
underestimate the difficulties of establishing a Middle East zone free of weapons of
mass destruction, but we offer our full support for the initiative to do so. We look
forward to the successful convening of the 2012 Conference as an important
contribution to the realisation of the 1995 Resolution.
Mr Chairman
The 2010 Conference rightly highlighted the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons. The reaffirmation by the Conference
of the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law,
including international humanitarian law, was significant. This outcome usefully
reinforces the Treaty's preamble which explicitly recognises the devastating
consequences for humanity of a nuclear war. 
As the Treaty's provisions make clear, averting that danger requires not only nuclear
disarmament but also constraining the spread of nuclear weapons. It remains
New Zealand's strong view that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing. And so while we continue to urge the nuclear-weapon States to
take greater efforts to decrease the role of nuclear weapons in their military doctrines
and security policies and ultimately to eliminate totally their nuclear arsenals, we are
no less committed to nuclear non-proliferation.
Transparency and accountability, through the Treaty's safeguards system, are an
essential underpinning of an effective non-proliferation regime. Equally critical is the
fulfilment by all States of their safeguards obligations under the NPT. The role of the
IAEA is central to this endeavour, but all States have a national responsibility to
comply with their obligations, and to act collectively to hold to account any State
party not living up to its commitments.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand recognises the inalienable right of all States parties to use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. But in exercising that right New Zealand firmly
believes that the strongest possible safety and security standards must be adhered
to throughout the nuclear fuel cycle.
However and wherever nuclear technology is used, nuclear safety and security are
of concern to us all - the consequences of a nuclear accident or a deliberate act of
nuclear terrorism would not be confined to national boundaries. New Zealand
therefore strongly supports the Nuclear Security Summit process which provides
indispensable impetus to the effort to secure nuclear and radiological materials
around the world.
The tragic Fukushima accident highlighted the importance of a robust, global nuclear
safety regime. All States have a stake in ensuring that that regime is further
strengthened, and New Zealand will play its part in the process underway to do so.
Mr Chairman
2015 marks the fiftieth year since negotiations began on the NPT which is now our
"cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime". 201 5 will
therefore be no ordinary year. If we are to ensure that the 2015 Review Conference
will genuinely fulfil the aspirations of the drafters of our Treaty, the time to act is now. 