Mr. President and dear Ambassador Chidyausiku,
First of all allow me to congratulate you on occasion of your election to the chairmanship of this meeting of the Third Preparatory Committee for the Conference to Revise the Non Proliferation Treaty in 2010. We are certain that your skills and personal knowledge will surely contribute to the success of tliis meeting. Rest assured that you can count on our full support.
Before I continue I would like to support: the statement by the distinguished Ambassador of Cuba in representation of the Movement of Non Aligned Countries. However, I would like to emphasize some aspects of the discussion in my national representation.
Mr. President,
A brief review of the environment presently surrounding the sphere of disarmament and arms control, in particular, amongst the States with nuclear capacity, affords us the confidence that we Member States will advance in this area which is so sensitive to humanity's destiny, and in the compliance with the obligations stipulated in the United Nations Charter regarding the preservation of international peace and security. Amongst the developments that inspire hope are the announcements of the Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United States thai: they will adopt concrete measures toward general and complete disarmament.
The Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty prohibited the five powers with nuclear capacity from transferring to other States technology for the development of nuclear arms. It also prohibited all other States from becoming a part of the Treaty if they acquired the technology necessary for the construction of nuclear arms. In this regard!, we could say that the Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty has been a success since out of 192 Member States only three have not become a part of it.
Nonetheless, not all the measures adopted by the states with nuclear capacity have been transparent, nor have they demonstrated enough political will to comply with the regimen established by the Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty, by allowing the exchange of nuclear technology with states that are outside of its regimen, and until the present having made no progress whatsoever regarding the thirteen practical steps towjird the implementation of Article Six of the Treaty irt order to facilitate progress towzird general and complete nuclear disarmament under effective international control.
Mr. President,
The total elimination of nuclear arms constitutes the only and absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear arms. The mere existence of these arms constitutes a constant concern of the peoples. As a step forward toward a world free of nuclear arms we join the urgent call to the nuclear powers in order that they offer enough guarantees through a binding treaty that they will not use or threaten to use these arms

against non nuclear States. While this treaty is concluded, we urge the nuclear powers to respect their commitments regarding negative security guarantees.
The Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non proliferation has played a crucial role in the prevention of greater vertical as well as horizontal proliferation of nuclear arms, in the promotion of cooperation for peaceful use and for the intention of achieving general and complete nuclear disarmament. Nonetheless, according the recent reports there are still approximately 26,000 nuclear arms in the world which threaten the existence of evei*y trace of life on our planet.
The problem of nuclear terrorism did not exist at the time the Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty was drafted. After the 9/11 attacks nuclear terrorism could take place in different forms, from attacks on a nuclear plant and its reactors to the launching of a nuclear bomb in urban areas. While nuclear arms exist the States that possess them must strengthen the security measures around their nuclear and fusion material arsenals, given the danger that they fall into the hands of terrorists. If these nuclear arms had already disappeared there would be no reason for this concern.
Taking into account the positive international environment regarding nucleiir disarmament we hope that the Conference to Revise the Non Proliferation Treaty in 2010 can, without a problem, establish a subsidiary body in Committee 1 on nucleiir disarmament which can address the matter of obligatio ns under Article VI of the Nucleiir Arms Non Proliferation Treaty, and in which a program to gradually eliminate all nucleiir arms within a specific term can be established.
Nicaragua unequivocally emphasizes that the Nuclear Arms Non Proliferation Treaty should in no way be interpreted as to affect the inalienable right of the States parts to, free of discrimination, research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful ends, in conformity with Article IV of the Treaty. ;Uso, all States have the right to participate in nuclear technology cooperation which ma y be established for peaceful ends by signatory States of the Treaty, including the nuclear powers.
We also believe that it is important for the Disarmament Conference to make progress in the elaboration of a Convention prohibiting the production of fusion material for the elaboration of nuclear arms. This Convention should contain specific stipulation s in the area of verification, in view of a five year time limit. Mr. President,
The establishment of nuclear arms free zone is internationally recognized as the basis of free accords entered into by the interested Spates, and which guarantee that a substantial part of the world be free of nuclear arms. It is important that the States that possess nuclear arms respect the statute for the denuclearization of these zones, which we consider a consequential measure toward nuclear disarnament and non proliferation. As a founding member of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, the creator of the First Nuclear Arms Free
Zone in the world, Nicaragua is very pleased to see that a treaty, which established a new Nuclear Arms Free Zone in Central Asia, is going into effect.
My delegation calls on all States of the Middle East, including the only State in the region that has declared that it possesses nuclear arms, Israel, to create a Nuclear Arms Free Zone in conformity with the pertinent Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. A contribution would thus be made toward the dissipation of tensions in the region, besides complementing other actions taken toward a lasting peace and security in the region.
Mr. President,
We call for the signing and ratification without delay and conditions of the Treaty for the Complete Prohibition of Nuclear Testing by nations in Annex II which have not done so, so that this treaty can go into effect as sooii as possible. The nuclear States have a great responsibility in this.
In concluding, Mr. President, I would like to express the faith of my delegation that in the near future humanity may live free of this nightmare of nuclear arms, and that the enormous resources that the nuclear countries destine to their construction, security and maintenance may be used for development assistance in the poorest countries of the world.
Thank you.