I wish to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of the Third Session of Preparatory Committee for the 2005 NPT Review Conference. Through you, I also wish to congratulate the other members of the bureau, We have full confidence in your ability to guide our work at this session to a successful conclusion. \ assure you and the bureau of the full cooperation of the Nigerian delegation in addressing the task ahead.
We associate ourselves with the statement made by Malaysia on behalf of the Member States of the Non-aligned Movement that are States Parties to NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
The Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was designed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, to enhance the goal of nuclear disarmament and general and complete disarmament, and to promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It, therefore, remains a vital instrument for promoting international peace and security. The Nigerian delegation reaffirms its commitment to the Treaty as the cornerstone of global non-proliferation regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament.
With 189 States Parties, it has become one of the treaties with the highest global adherence. It is, however, regrettable that the Treaty has continuously been weakened by misconceptions and non-compliance. This misconception arises from the belief inherent in the actions and statements of States Parties that the obligation to abide by the Treaty rests with non-nuclear weapon States alone, particularly the developing countries. In the attempt to shift responsibility to the developing States, the nuclear-weapon States ignore the commitment they had undertaken under Article VI. Connected with this is the impression often created that the Moscow Treaty of June 2003 and the moratorium on nuclear testing have sufficiently resolved the problem of nuclear disarmament. The wrong notion that this belief carries with it is that vertical proliferation is under control and is, in any case, under trusted hands, a belief equally shared by some non-nuclear weapon States Parties from the developed world.
While these voluntary measures represent important progress in the field of nuclear disarmament, they, however, lack provisions that could lead to total elimination of nuclear weapons as well as the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency.
My delegation believes that the implementation of the Treaty is the responsibility of all States Parties. The best way to strengthen the nuclear non-
proliferation regime, therefore, is through full compliance by all States parties, without exception, with the provisions of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
The Nigerian delegation endorses the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference, and in particular the 13 practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the Treaty and paragraphs 3 and 4 © of the 1995 Decision on the Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, As these steps have not been met, we wish to underscore the need to reaffirm and strengthen them at the 2005 Review Conference. There is need, in this connection, for increased transparency with regard to nuclear weapon capabilities and the implementation of agreements pursuant to Article VL
The Nigerian delegation expresses strong support for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and welcomes its signature by 171 States and ratification by 110 States. We also wish to underscore the importance and urgency of its entry into force and in this connection, urge States that have not yet ratified the Treaty, especially those States whose ratification is necessary for its entry into force, to do so as soon as possible so that the Treaty can enter into force without further delay. My delegation further urges the nuclear-weapon States to continue to maintain the moratorium on nuclear testing pending the entry into force of the Treaty.
An increasing number of States have acquired the technology to procuce fissile materials and nuclear explosive devices which was made possible because some States continued to possess nuclear weapons. This is why it is important to commence negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile materials for the production of nuclear weapons and other explosive devices. Such a measure will help to advance the process of nuclear disarmament.
We recognize the important role of IAEA in promoting nuclear non-proliferation regime, in particular its role as the global focal point for technical cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as in the fields; of nuclear verification and safeguards. My delegation reaffirms its belief in the inalienable rights of States Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination.
Nuclear-weapon-free zones play important role in the maintenance of regional and global peace and security, including the cause of nuclear-non-proliferation. For this reason, my delegation wishes to underline the need for consolidating the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones and establishing new ones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among States in the regions
concerned. We believe that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones created by the Treaties of Tiateioico, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba is a positive step towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament. We express the hope that the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (the Treaty of Pelindaba) will be ratified by the required number of States so that it can enter into force as soon as possible.
The Nigerian delegation reaffirms the importance of the Resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and recognizes that the resolution remains valid until its goals and objectives are achieved. We reaffirm our support for the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons as well as other weapons of mass destruction and to this end urge all States in the region that have not done so, without exception, to accede to NPT as soon as possible and to place alt their nuclear facilities under full-scope IAEA safeguards.
Mr. Chairman,
The 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the 2000 Review Conference had underscored the importance of security assurances. My delegation wishes to emphasize the need to reaffirm such assurances. Atore importantly, my delegation stresses the need to conclude a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear weapon States which should be pursued as a matter of priority.
The Nigerian delegation attaches great importance to the General Assembly resolution 58/40 of 8 December 2003, which we had the honour to submit on behalf of the Group of African Sates, on the prohibition cf the dumping of radioactive wastes and call on States to take appropriate measures to prevent any dumping of nuclear or radioactive wastes that would infringe on the sovereignty of States. We also wish to express our support for the effective implementation of the Code of Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste of IAEA as a means of enhancing the protection of States from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories.
Finally, the Nigerian delegation expresses its conviction that multilateralism is the core principle in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation towards maintaining and strengthening universal norms and enlarging their scope.
I thank you.