Statement by Norway in the General Debate at the 2018 Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference. 23 April 2018.
Check against delivery
Mr Chair,
This second meeting of the Preparatory Committee to the 2020 NPT Review
Conference is taking place at a critical juncture. The DPRK nuclear and
missile crisis remains unresolved. The JCPOA is under growing pressure.
There are fundamentally opposing views on how best to achieve the overall
objective of a safer world without nuclear weapons. In fact, we may be
moving in the wrong direction. Core arms control treaties are under strain.
Prospects for nuclear arms races are looming. The risk of nuclear terrorism
is far from being eradicated.
Against such a grim backdrop, it is vital to preserve and consolidate the
NPT. This is a daunting task. It will require mobilisation of genuine political
will. Last year the Netherlands steered the first meeting of the Preparatory
Committee in an excellent manner. Despite different perspectives on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, we were able to exchange
views on a number of difficult topics in a constructive manner. Although we
had different points of departure, we managed to focus on the importance
of the NPT as the core pillar for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
We need to continue to pursue this constructive approach. Norway greatly
appreciates that this is the chosen path of the Polish chair of the second
meeting of the Preparatory Committee. We would like to thank all those
concerned for the inclusive and transparent preparations for this meeting.
Mr Chair,
We need to mobilise the political will needed to develop a forward-looking
agenda on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation for the NPT that we
will all be able to concur with in 2020. 
Our point of departure must be the legal obligations of the Treaty itself, and
the agreed outcome of the NPT review conferences. We attach particular
importance to the Plan of Action adopted in 2010.
The agenda should include:
• Reaffirmation of the vitality of the NPT. In 2020 we will
commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty’s entry into force. It
is natural to pay tribute to the fundamental contribution it has made
to global security, and to underline its continued relevance.
• Reiteration of the overall objective of a safer world without nuclear
weapons. We must reaffirm the unequivocal undertaking of the
nuclear-weapons states to accomplish the total elimination of their
nuclear arsenals, while also recognising that all states must
contribute to this end.
• Promotion of enhanced trust and confidence. We need to explore all
avenues to uphold existing arms control agreements. We need to
ensure compliance with existing treaties as well as laying the
necessary groundwork for new reductions in the future. In particular
the US and the Russian Federation are strongly encouraged to
maintain and extend the New START, resolve outstanding compliance
matters related to INF, and initiate strategic talks that could lead to
deeper cuts in all categories of nuclear weapons.
• Nuclear disarmament verification increases confidence among the
nuclear weapons states and the non-nuclear weapons states that
disarmament commitments are adhered to. Norway took a lead on UN
General Assembly resolution 71/67 on nuclear disarmament
verification. We are pleased that the Governmental Group of Experts
will commence its work in a few weeks.
• Preventing a nuclear arms race is of great importance. In this light,
the early negotiation and conclusion of an effectively verifiable Fissile 
Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) seems to be more relevant than ever
before. We would like to thank the leadership shown by Canada,
Germany and the Netherlands on the FMCT process.
• Consolidation of the non-test norm is essential. Norway has been
consistent in advocating an early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). We urge all remaining Annex
II states to meet the international community’s requirements in this
respect.
• The fact-based approach to the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear detonations should inspire us to do more to reduce the risks
associated with nuclear weapons. Norway has supported the
resolution on decreasing the operational readiness of nuclear
weapons systems in the General Assembly.
• A world without nuclear weapons cannot be achieved without a
credible and robust non-proliferation regime. We must resolve the
current threat to the regime posed by the DPRK and preserve the
JCPOA. A fundamental precondition for a credible non-proliferation
regime is the full universalisation of the comprehensive safeguards
agreements and the Additional Protocol.
• Lack of agreement on how to achieve the objective of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East prevented us from reaching consensus
at the NPT review conferences in 2005 and 2015. We must do
everything possible to prevent this happening again in 2020.
Achieving nuclear weapons free zones that are freely agreed on by
the countries concerned is essential. Establishing a nuclear weapons
free zone for the Korean Peninsula would have a tremendous positive
impact on the global non-proliferation regime.
• Stepping up efforts on nuclear security is also an important part of
the humanitarian approach. The IAEA has a central role. We urge all 
states parties to ratify the amended Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism, and the related IAEA instruments, and to implement the
requirements set out in UN Security Council resolution 1540. In
collaboration with the IAEA, Norway will host an international
symposium in Oslo on 5-7 June this year on minimisation of highly
enriched uranium in civilian sector.
• Norway is fully committed to Article IV of the NPT. Civilian nuclear
activities extend far beyond generating electricity, and that peaceful
nuclear applications in a range of sectors are crucial for achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. We encourage all states that are in a
position to do so to contribute to the IAEA assistance programmes in
these fields.
Mr Chair,
We must not disregard the fact that there are fundamental differences
within the NPT community on how best to achieve the zero option.
Nevertheless, it should be possible to reach agreement on many steps that
can bring the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation agenda forward.
In the lead-up to 2020, we need to focus on these steps. This will require
political will and readiness to do so. Norway is ready.