1
REPUBLIC OF PALAU
General Debate
Statement to the Ninth Review Conference of States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
30 April 2015, New York
Delivered by H.E. Dr. Caleb Otto,
Permanent Representative of Palau to the United Nations
Good morning Excellences and Colleagues.
Good morning to you, President, and thank you for giving me the floor.
My delegation wishes to join others in expressing our deepest sympathy and
condolences to the government and people Nepal for the great suffering they are
experiencing due to the tragic loss of lives from the devastating earthquake.
Palau wishes to congratulate H.E. Ambassador Farouke for her election as the President
of the Ninth Review Conference of States Parties to the Treaty on the NPT. May we also
extend our congratulations to all members of the Bureau. We wish you success and
pledge to all of you the support and cooperation of my delegation.
Mr. President,
In this 70th anniversary year of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, let us
all redouble our efforts to outlaw and eliminate these worst weapons of terror.
Palau is proud to be the first nation in the world to have adopted a constitution banning
nuclear weapons. As a Pacific Island nation, we have a particular interest in realizing a
nuclear-weapon-free world, as our region has experienced the catastrophic and ongoing
2
humanitarian consequences of more than 300 nuclear test explosions conducted over the
course of five decades.
We stand in solidarity with the Republic of the Marshall Islands in its legal proceedings
before the International Court of Justice aimed at compelling the nuclear-armed states to
fulfill, at long last, their legal obligation to disarm. Forty-five years after the entry into
force of the NPT, it is unacceptable that more than 15,000 nuclear weapons remain in the
world, threatening human survival and the fragile ecosystems of our precious planet.
Even today, Palau, is within a striking distance of nuclear warheads from an unfriendly
nation.
Mr. President,
It is clear that the NPT faces major challenges. Whilst it is has been largely successful in
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons to new states, very little has been achieved with
respect to the treaty’s disarmament obligations. It is of deep concern that all five NPT
nuclear-weapon states continue to invest heavily in programs to upgrade and modernize
their nuclear arsenals.
Against this backdrop, three major conferences have been convened to examine the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons and build global support for a treaty banning
them completely. We commend the Norwegian, Mexican and Austrian governments for
hosting these important conferences, which have successfully reframed the discourse on
nuclear weapons to focus on their harmful effects on human beings.
Palau fully endorses the Pledge delivered at the Vienna conference in December last year
to launch a diplomatic process to negotiate and adopt a nuclear weapon ban treaty. This
would fill the gaps in existing international law and help advance nuclear disarmament.
Negotiations should begin in time for the 70th anniversaries of the Hiroshima and
Nagasaki bombings. We urge all states to endorse this important Pledge.
Nuclear weapons are the deadliest of all weapons of mass destruction, yet they are the
only ones not yet outlawed. Palau supports the proposal by the New Agenda Coalition to
devote substantial time at this Review Conference, in Main Committee 1, to discussing
options for effective measures to ban and eliminate nuclear weapons. We cannot afford to
delay any longer the task of launching treaty negotiations; 2015 must be a year of action.
A nuclear weapon ban treaty would complement the NPT and other related treaties,
including the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the various regional nuclearweapon-free
zone treaties, including the South Pacific nuclear-free-zone Treaty of
Rarotonga. The negotiations should proceed even if the nuclear-armed states and some of
their nuclear-dependent allies refuse to participate. It is important to establish a clear
legal norm against the use and possession of these weapons.
Palau supports a negotiating process that is open to all states and blockable by none. We
believe that a process similar to the ones that led to the successful adoption of the Mine 
3
Ban Treaty and Convention on Cluster Munitions would be the most likely to achieve our
desired result. We stand ready to join such negotiations this year. We are determined to
ensure that no one else ever suffers from the horrendous effects of these weapons.
Mr. President,
Palau considers the banning of nuclear weapons to be an essential aspect of our broader
struggle to end violence; to promote harmony and friendship among the peoples of the
world; to achieve justice and respect for human rights; and to ensure a safe, clean and
healthy environment for the benefit of present and future generations.
Thank you for your kind attention. 