PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the UN and Other
International Organizations in Vienna
General Debate
1st Meeting of the Preparatory Commission of the NPT
Delivered by RE. Maria Zeneida Angara Collinson
02-12 May 2017
Mr. Chair,
On behalf of the Philippine Delegation, I wish to congratulate you on your election as
President of the First Preparatory Committee Meeting of the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.
We look forward to working closely with other States Parties prior to and during this
First Preparatory Committee Meeting, as well as in the two PrepComms in the lead
up to the 2020 NPT Review Conference.
My delegation is confident that under your able leadership, this meeting will better
prepare us for 2020.
The Philippines reaffirms its strong commitment to the NPT and acknowledges its
paramount importance and contribution to global peace and security throughout the
years. At a time when the role of nuclear weapons in national security strategies is
being bolstered instead of reduced, the Treaty’s relevance is challenged and it is up
to its States Parties to make it work.
The Philippines is firmly committed to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons as
enshrined in the Philippine Constitution. As an active member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, currently chaired by the Philippines, we are party to the
Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapons-Free-Zone Treaty or the Bangkok Treaty, which
aims to create a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Southeast Asian region.
Our experience in the Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapons Free Zone is proof of the
viability of such an arrangement. The ASEAN principles of consensus, goodwill, and
cooperation, which have contributed to its success, can serve as examples for future
nuclear weapons-free-zones.
Mr. Chair,
Although consensus was not achieved at the 2015 NPT RevCon, the Philippines
remains confident that the Treaty, with balanced and effective implementation of
commitments across all three pillars, will take us to closer to achieve our objectives
of nuclear disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
We see an opportunity to preserve the gains of the 2010 NPT Review Conference by
revisiting its Outcome Document and the 64-Point Action Plan and pursue
implementation with more vigor to once and for all break the deadlock in nuclear
disarmament negotiations.
It is of utmost importance that States Parties take stock of the factors that led to the
failure of the 2015 NPT RevCon and build upon the gains of successful Review
Conferences to guide us as we work towards a successful Review Conference three
years from now.
Nuclear Disarmament
Of the three pillars, the Philippines is most concerned about the continued lack of
progress in the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments.
My delegation cannot overemphasize Action Points 3 and 5 of the 64-Point Action
Plan which state that “,. the nuclear weapon States commit to undertake further
efforts to reduce and ultimately eliminate all types of nuclear weapons and “The
nuclear weapon States commit to accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading
to nuclear disarmament On the contrary, nuclear weapon modernization
programs continue unabated and nuclear weapon States refuse to discuss concrete
nuclear disarmament initiatives until they have determined that conditions are ripe for
such an undertaking.
In a little over a month from now, many of us will once again gather in New York at
the Conference to Negotiate a Legally Binding Instrument to Prohibit Nuclear
Weapons, Leading to their Total Elimination.
The Philippines strongly supports this Conference. We believe that a future nuclear
ban treaty will not supplant, but rather reinforce, the NPT, particularly the nuclear
disarmament pillar.
Nuclear Non-Proliferation
The Philippines notes with grave concern recent events which constitute a threat to
global peace and security.
We refer to the heightening of tensions in the Korean Peninsula, brought about by
the continued defiance of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) of
relevant UN Security Council Resolutions, as manifested in its multiple nuclear tests
and ballistic missile launches in the past few years.
We call on the DPRK and all other parties to take the necessary steps towards the
de-escalation of tensions in the Korean Peninsula. We call on the DPRK to return
immediately to the NPT and implement its earlier safeguards agreement with the
IAEA by allowing access to its facilities by IAEA safeguards inspectors.
We also call on all Member States, who have not yet done so, to accede to the NPT
and conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the IAEA.
The Philippines also lends its strong support for the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and
calls on all concerned parties to take concrete steps to jumpstart plans of convening
a Conference on the Middle East as soon as possible.
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
The Philippines attaches great importance to the peaceful use of nuclear energy as a
catalyst for contributing to the Sustainable Development Agenda and my country’s
own development goals in the field of health, agriculture, industry, and water
management.
The Philippines also underscores the leading role of the IAEA, particularly its
technical cooperation programme, in making available platforms for Member States,
especially those from developing countries, to harness nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes.
Furthermore, as the Philippines continues to voice its concerns over the
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and reiterates the urgency of
highlighting this as a powerful argument against the continued existence of nuclear
weapons, we call on all NPT States Parties to be mindful that they should under no
circumstances consider the utilization of nuclear technology for anything other than
for peaceful uses.
In closing, Mr. Chair,
I wish to quote from our previous statement at the First Preparatory Commission for
the 2015 Review Conference five years ago when we said that “the only way to
ensure the prevention of a nuclear holocaust is to take away the nuclear option from
the hands of men who are so fallible”. We also said back then that we must “strive
with even greater effort during this review cycle, especially on the pillars of nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation”.
These words are as relevant today as they were in 2012. In light of many recent
events, which undermine the global non-proliferation regime which our predecessors
sought to build, my delegation calls on all other participants to this Preparatory
Commission meeting to keep these events in mind, as we prepare for the next
review cycle.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.