1
STATEMENT
H.E. LIBRAN N. CABACTULAN
Permanent Representative
Permanent Mission of the Philippine to the United Nations
General Debate
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
29 April 2014
United Nations Headquarters
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
The Philippines is pleased to see a veteran in the field of disarmament chairing this
PrepCom and we offer you our warmest congratulations. We know that your job will not
be easy but we have full faith in your skills and abilities to help us lay the groundwork for
next year’s Review Conference.
Needless to say, you have the Philippines’ full support.
We are back in New York for the final Preparatory session for the 2015 NPT Review
Conference – one that my country is especially interested in, having presided over the
last Review Conference four years ago. Given the successes we had in 2010, it was, for
a moment, tempting to look forward to 2015 with high expectations.
The faith of the world to one day reach the goal of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons rests largely on the NPT. If we are to keep that faith, we have to work hard to
maintain the Treaty’s credibility. The only way to do that is to implement all the
commitments we made since we signed the NPT forty-six years ago.
This PrepCom will allow us to take stock of the progress we have achieved as regards
the implementation of the 64-point Action Plan we adopted by consensus in 2010.
Having attended the first two PrepComs and having closely watched developments in
the fields of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation over the last four years, we are
seriously concerned that we will not be able to follow through the commitments made at
the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
This is especially after failure of the just concluded UN Disarmament Commission
session to produce consensus recommendations especially in the areas of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.
2
And then there is the still un-convened Conference on the Establishment of a Middle
East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction that
was supposed to take place in 2012 – a crucial commitment we all made at the 2010
Review Conference and one that is reflected in its Outcome Document.
We cannot overemphasize that the Conference is a crucial first step towards achieving
lasting peace in the Middle East. We also cannot overemphasize that continued failure
to convene the Middle East Conference seriously undermines the provisions of the NPT
and consequently weakens the Treaty.
Whether we accept it or not, until this Conference is finally convened discussions in this
PrepCom, in the 2015 Review Conference, and all future disarmament meetings, would
revolve around this issue.
Mr. Chairman,
We have heard calls and pleas for patience – that the road toward the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons will be long and challenging and hence targets and
timelines are unrealistic demands.
But almost 50 years into our campaign for global zero, with still over 17,000 nuclear
weapons in the world, with full awareness by now that the power of a single warhead
alone could significantly kill and destroy people and the environment and cause longterm
destruction, we believe it is high time to demand more.
It is time to eliminate these weapons before they eliminate us.
Let us not wait for an unfortunate nuclear accident to take place. Nor stand at the
ringside to see which of the few countries that have these weapons, countries that
believe in fact that nuclear weapons in their own hands are legitimate, would blink first
and resort to their nuclear arsenal in the face of conflicts and crises.
We believe the world has been patient enough.
For too long we have debated on the best way forward – the practical versus the
ambitious; the piecemeal versus the comprehensive. What is clear to us is that we are
not out of options. But that there is not one dominant guaranteed formula to achieve our
objectives.
What is unrealistic is to demand that the rest of the world stand idly by while we insist
on a formula that has consistently failed to work.
However, we remain prepared to listen to States Parties, especially the nuclear weapon
states, in this PrepCom and at the 2015 Review Conference, on their respective
implementations of the Action Plan.
3
The Philippines particularly welcomes strengthened P5 engagement to advance
progress on NPT obligations and the 2010 NPT Action Plan. It is our hope that these
engagements would eventually evolve into a venue for multilateral reduction of nuclear
arsenals.
We wish to reiterate that it is in our collective interest to ensure that the Conclusions and
Recommendations for Follow-on Actions of the 2010 NPT Review Conference Outcome
Document are implemented.
The Philippines will particularly insist on having a definitive timeframe in the implementation
of commitments by nuclear weapon states, as contained in Actions 3 and 5.
Mr. Chairman,
For its part, the Philippines is ready to report on our implementation of our obligations
as a non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the NPT.
My country remains not in possession of nuclear weapons – as reflected in our
Constitution, and we remain true to our obligations under the Treaty on the Southeast
Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone not to allow such weapons in our backyard and in our
own territory.
But our region’s Treaty will not be effective if the nuclear weapon states are not on
board. We call on them to sign and accede to the Treaty’s Protocol as soon as possible.
We have actively done our part in spreading the goal of nuclear disarmament both
within the United Nations and outside.
For the Philippines, nuclear weapons are illegal under international law, including
international humanitarian law. It is a weapon where the notion of control is meaningless
and the idea of military necessity absurd. There is a glaring moral imperative to get rid of
such weapons.
It is for these reasons that we have strongly supported the first ever High Level Meeting
on Nuclear Disarmament held in September last year. We are committed to get the ball
rolling on the concrete steps laid down in the follow-on resolution to the High Level
Meeting including the immediate start of negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention
that is universal, inclusive and comprehensive.
The Philippines has also actively supported and participated in the Oslo and Nayarit
conferences on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and will continue
do so in future conferences including the one that will be held in Austria later this year.
These Conferences have no doubt significantly contributed to furthering disarmament
education. 
4
We urge all States to take part, especially the nuclear weapon states. Listen to the
hibakushas tell their stories of how in a single second a single detonation robbed them
and their families of what could have been productive lives. Hear the technical experts
attest to the inadequacy of our existing mechanisms on disaster response in the face of
massive destruction and chaos. Learn from health experts that it will be our children, the
young people, who will be the most vulnerable to nuclear radiation and who will be the
least to survive a nuclear detonation.
Critics say we do not need to hear the obvious. But sometimes, we do need to be
reminded.
These Conferences, in our view, do not only serve educational purposes. We believe
these can be important venues to help us determine the way forward. We are, anyway,
policy-makers and not academics.
We wish to underscore that humanitarian, together with legal and moral grounds, give
us the strongest case against nuclear weapons.
To discuss the complementarity of the legal, humanitarian and moral bases for nuclear
disarmament, my delegation has organized, together with the Global Security Institute,
a side event on “Nuclear Weapons and the Moral Compass” to be held on 30 April at
1:15 p.m. in this room. We invite all States Parties and members of the civil society to
join us.
Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines believes the debate on the usefulness of nuclear weapons should end
while the case for criminalizing the possession of such weapons must now find life in
law either by treaty or court opinion.
My delegation will further discuss in detail our positions and reports under the Three
Main Clusters and Specific Issues.
Thank you.