Draft as of 23 April 201 8/1 2:30H
PHILIPPINE ST ATEMENT
Delivered by
H.E. MARIA CLEOFE NATMDAD
Ambassador and Permanent Representative
On the Occasion of the General Debate of the
2nd Preparatory Committee Meeting to the 2020 Review Conference on the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
23 April 2018
Assembly Hall, Palais des Nations, Geneva
Mr. Chair,
1. My delegation congratulates you on your assumption as Chair of this important
meeting. We associate ourselves with the statements delivered by Venezuela on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and Germany on behalf of the Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament Initiative.
2. The Philippines is hopeful that the 2nd PrepCom meeting will see States Parties forging
a spirit of positive engagement that will enable us to explore, develop and agree on
'practical outcomes for the RevCon. The reflections of the Chair of the First Prepcom
underlined that we need to "maintain open, inclusive and transparent dialogue, and
work on areas where progress is possible and search for compromise where
necessary.
3. The success of the RevCon will reaffirm ou? collective commitment to the NPT and
infuse it with the vitality required to reinforce its role in the firmament of the global
security architecture.
4. The 2010 64-point NPT Action Plan and the 2000 13 Practical Steps embody the
consensus reached to bring the NPT forward. These understandings outline the
1
commitments we have set upon ourselves and the pathways that multilateralism can
determine to be possible.
Mr. Chair,
5. The challenges confronting the torrent global nuclear security environment should
deepen, and not shake, our resolve to implement our obligations under the Treaty. The
fundamental responsibility rests on the two countries with the largest arsenals to show
leadership and sustain their engagement on nuclear disarmament.
l6.
The Philippines was among the122 states that voted for the adoption of the Treaty
Prohibiting Nuclear Weapons in New York in July 2017. The Philippines signed this
treaty on the day it was opened for signature and looks forward to ratifying it. The
TPNW underlines the political will of a resounding majority of NPT States Parties to
establish a legal norm in line with Article Vl of the NPT and strengthen the NPT pillar
on nuclear disarmament.
7. The Philippines considers the strengthening and development of multilateral nuclear
verification measures as salient to such pillar, and in this regard, pays much attention
to the work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification established pursuant to UNGA Resolution A/RES/71/67.
Mr. Chair,
8. The Philippines places high importance on the following issues: a legally binding
instrument on Negative Security Assurances, the negotiation of a Treaty on Fissile
Materials that would look at all stocks given that this is the most fair way forward, the
entry into force of the CTBT, respect for nuclear weapon free zones, in particular the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ), adherence to IAEA CSA
and the AP, more ratifications for the 2005 Amendment to the CPPNM, an agreement
on a nuclear fuel bank to assure guarantee of supply, and, support for the IAEA's
technical cooperation programs. We are encouraged by recent decisions in the
Conference on Disarmament to agree on a program of work.
2
Mr. Chair,
9. The NPDI papers on transparency and reporting and the strengthened review process
present possible practical outcomes of this RevCon process and requests delegations
to study them carefully.
IO.Renewing discussions on how to improve transparency and the efficiency of our
working methods is highly useful in the context of our efforts to ensure the long-term
sustainability and viability of this treaty.
Mr. Chair,
11. One of the key agreements in 1995 is that the treaty would be extended indefinitely on
the understanding that efforts would be taken on establishing a nuclear weapons free
zone in the Middle East. We highly appreciate the resolve of States Parties including
regional groups and organizations to sustain the process of engagement despite
challenging circumstances.
12. As a State Party to the SEANWFZ, the Philippines recognizes that nuclear weapons
free zones play a reinforcing role in the global disarmament and non-proliferation
framework. We support discussions to establish more robust dialogue and
cooperation between and among the zones, including within the NPT process.
13.The Philippines believes that any effort to undermine the JCPOA will have serious
repercussions on the 2020 Revcon. The Phlilippines commends the P5+1 and Iran for
their efforts, and hopes that the process will continue to serve as a model of how
multilateralism can shape solutions that work. We also commend the IAEA for its role
in this regard.
3
14.The Philippines as a known gender champion strongly supports calls for increased
gender balance in disarmament processes and within the NPT in particular and would
like to see enhanced efforts in this regard.
Mr. Chair,
l5.On procedural issues, the Philippines thanks Malaysia for nominating Amb.
Muhammad Shahrul Ikram Yaakob and will fully support him in his work. The
Philippines hopes that the President for the 2020 Review Conference will be agreed
upon soon to enable him or her to undertake consultations at the soonest possible
time and begin working with members of the Secretariat and his or her future Bureau.
The Philippines would also like to see a timely agreement on the subsidiary bodies.
Mr. Chair,
l6.The Philippines' firm and principled commitment to the NPT and the goal of a world
free of nuclear weapons is anchored in our Constitution. We believe that this Revcon
process is an opportunity for States Parties to establish without doubt the enduring
value of multilateralism in pursuing disarmament and security.
17. We should endeavor to reach important outcomes in 2020, with balance and substance
across the Treaty's three pillars.
l8.There are two parts to every outcome document of the NPT: the review and the
forward-looking process. We must have both in equal measure. The Philippines wilt
work with all delegations to ensure that we have a substantive review and an
ambitious forward-looking process.
I thank you Mr. Chair.
4