Statement of
of the Republic of Poland
General Debate – II NPT Preparatory Committee
Mr. Chairman,
Let me start with pleasant element of my today intervention and congratulate
you, Ambassador Bugajski on your appointment as a Chair of this second session
of the Preparatory Committee. Assuming this function you have become,
together with ambassador Wyzner twenty years ago, a part of the exclusive
group of eminent Polish diplomats who have been privileged to chair such event.
Poland highly appreciates all work you have done in the course of the
preparations to the Preparatory Committee. I wish to assure you, Mr. Chairman,
of our full support and cooperation in the discharge of your important mandate.
Mr. Chairman,
Poland fully aligns itself with the statement which will be delivered by the
representative of the European Union.
Due to the exceptional importance of the current Non-Proliferation Treaty
review cycle and involvement of Poland in the attainment of the goals and
objectives of the NPT, I would like to emphasize some aspects which are
particularly important in our assessment.
Mr. Chairman,
Supporting and promoting the existing international law has been made one of
the Polish priorities in the Security Council. As a current non-permanent member
of the Security Council Poland is especially devoted to maintaining the primacy
of the rules-based order. The NPT since its entry into force has been the central
piece of the global regime for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. It has
constantly stimulated international efforts to stop the spread of nuclear
weapons, to create a nuclear weapon free world and to enable access to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. Poland remains committed to strengthening
each of the NPT’s mutually reinforcing pillars. Non-proliferation, disarmament
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy are complementary goals and should be
pursued together, systematically and with equal determination. 
Current geopolitical challenges only underline the role of the Treaty in this
respect and the necessity to strengthen it. Let me mention some of them:
- the rapid development of the DPRK’s nuclear programme, however we
took note of the latest DPRK’s declaration and we expect Pyongyang to
deliver on it;
- the uncertain future of the JCPOA;
- lack of progress on the Conference on the establishment of the WMD Free
Zone in the Middle East; and
- increasing divisions on the terms and pace of nuclear disarmament.
Despite all these circumstances the NPT continues to be the essential and in
reality, unique part of the modern security system as well as the ultimate point
of reference for the initiatives in non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
The current review cycle is yet another opportunity to reaffirm the integrity and
viability of the NPT. The states parties should therefore make a full use of all
opportunities to review the implementation of the treaty. It regards not only
discussions held at the Review Conference, but also during the preparatory
committee meetings. They have a role not only in building a good climate for the
Review Conference but also in testing ideas and bridging differences. It was
therefore our sincere intension to ensure the highest level of transparency and
inclusiveness during the preparatory phase to this conference.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear disarmament remains a fundamental pillar of the NPT. We all share a
common vision of a world without nuclear weapons. Poland believes that the
only way to achieve it, is through effective, verifiable and irreversible
disarmament. It will be possible only when all states work in unison and are
convinced about benefits of this processfor their security. Therefore, we support
the progressive step-by-step approach to nuclear disarmament as the best way
to achieve our commonly shared goal.
We focus on preserving the integrity and vitality of the NPT Treaty as the
cornerstone of the non-proliferation system. This conviction has brought us to
assume chairmanship of the 2018 NPT Preparatory Committee. We are
committed to strengthening existing organizations like the International Atomic
Energy Agency, to working towards entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and to commencement of negotiations on a treaty
banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other
explosive devices (Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty – FMCT).
Moreover, we are intensively working on establishing a robust and credible
verification regime of concreate nuclear disarmament measures. This includes
our visible role in the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
Verification (IPNDV) and in the UN Group of Governmental Experts on
Verification (UN GGE). Additionally it is flanked by Polish contribution to the
works of High-Level FMCT Expert Preparatory Group.
Mr. Chairman,
The non-proliferation regime has been consistently challenged by non-state
actors, who seek access to WMD related material and technologies. Therefore,
Poland strongly supports achieving the highest possible level of nuclear security
within a framework of the IAEA. From the very beginning we have been actively
involved in works of Proliferation Security Initiative as well as the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. Moreover, by assuming the Chairmanship of the
Hague Code of Conduct against proliferation of the ballistic missiles for the
period 2017-2018, Poland has clearly demonstrated that interlinked
proliferation of missiles and nuclear technologies also remain on our security
radar. Moreover, we very much value the role of the export control regimes as
complementary tools to the NPT provisions in curbing the illicit proliferation
efforts.
Let me also highlight the vital role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the field of non-proliferation. The IAEA’s system of safeguards is fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays indispensable role
in the implementation of the NPT. Poland supports the strengthening of the IAEA
safeguards systems, including universal adherence to comprehensive safeguards
agreements and additional protocol as the verification standard.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to renew our support for the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy worldwide. Poland’s Ministry of Energy updates plan to implement
nuclear power programme. It is aimed at diversification of electricity generation
structure, ensuring security of energy supply and reducing negative energy
sector’s impact on environment. Poland pledges full transparency with regard to
its future activities in the domain of nuclear energy. We have also committed to
the highest level of nuclear security. In the past Poland has hosted several 
missions of the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure that Polish nuclear
infrastructure meets all international standards and best practices in that field.
Mr. Chairman,
As we are approaching the 50th Anniversary of the NPT, we need to find the right
perspective and restore the right balance. We should be calming down the
emotions and restoring the spirit of trust and cooperation. We should focus on
how to make NPT deliver and how to make it fit for the future. Let me therefore
reiterate our unconditional support for the NPT and commitment to its full and
balanced implementation. We call on all state parties to take proactive, but at
the same time constructive and flexible approach in order to ensure substantial
outcome of the II Preparatory Committee. We hope it will give a strong and
positive impetus to the review cycle and pave the way towards the successful
2020 Review Conference.
Thank you Mr. Chairman