Check against delivery
Statement by H.E. Adrian Vierița, Permanent Representative of Romania
at the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Second Session, Geneva, 23 April – 4 May 2018
General Debate
Mr. Chairman,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Ambassador Bugajski, on your appointment
as Chair of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee and to assure you of
Romania’s full support in achieving a successful, comprehensive and balanced outcome.
Romania fully aligns itself with the EU statement. Allow me, at the same time, to highlight
a few issues of particular importance for my country.
Mr. Chairman,
Romania remains firmly committed to maintaining the NPT, as the key multilateral
instrument for strengthening international peace, security and stability, to promoting its
universality and enhancing its implementation.
In light of the 50th Anniversary of the NPT’s entry into force in 2020, Romania encourages
all Parties to display a forward looking approach, by doing their utmost for minimizing the
different views, and look for the compromise to advance our shared goal of strengthening
the integrity of NPT across all three pillars.
Romania believes that the main objective of the review process is to identify the areas and
the means for further progress, to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty and to
achieve its universality by reaffirming the validity and importance of the 2010 Action Plan. 
Mr. Chairman,
Romania is further committed to the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons, achieved
in an effective, verifiable and irreversible manner, through a progressive approach,
based on pragmatic and realistic measures that could provide real and lasting progress
on disarmament.
It is our view that accomplishing tangible results on nuclear disarmament requires a
consolidated cooperation with the nuclear weapon states and a careful consideration of
the international security environment.
The main achievable measures towards this end should be the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the commencement within the
Conference on Disarmament of the negotiations of a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty
(FMCT), a crucial instrument in advancing our common endeavor for nuclear
disarmament process.
A viable road to nuclear disarmament in the current security environment should
concentrate first and foremost on improving the geopolitical conditions, by developing
measures of confidence and transparency building. We welcome the progress made
towards the implementation of Article VI by the nuclear weapon states. Meeting the
central limits of the New START Treaty is commendable. We also underline the
importance of preserving the viability of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty
(INF), an essential instrument for the international security and stability.
Mr. Chairman,
We have been seriously concerned by the violation of the international obligations and
the development of nuclear and ballistic programs which threaten the international
peace and security and the global non-proliferation regime, in complete disregard of the
UN Security Council Resolutions.
Within this context, we welcome the ongoing diplomatic demarches for a peaceful
solution and the prospect of the upcoming high level talks on denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula. Concurrently, we underline the need to have concrete and verifiable
steps from the DPRK to demonstrate the genuine political will for a complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization and the desire to address international community’s
concerns.
Romania welcomes the work done by the IAEA in monitoring the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) based on a robust technical mechanism. The continuation of
the full and rigorous implementation of the Plan of Action, based on the letter and spirit
of the UN Security Council Resolution 2231 will foster the regional and international
security and will build trust among parties. 
The 1995 Middle East Resolution remains valid to this day, but progress towards a
Middle East Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) Free Zone requires dialogue and
building confidence among the stakeholders in the region on the basis of arrangements
freely agreed upon by them. In light of this, Romania condemns in the strongest terms
any use of weapons of mass destruction. Such acts have no justification, under any
circumstances and must be addressed in a resolute manner by the international
community.
Mr. Chairman,
Another measure that would significantly enhance the international security
environment and strengthen the non-proliferation regime is achieving the universal
implementation of the IAEA’s Additional Protocol (AP), the de facto standard for
verifying the NPT safeguards obligations. Romania once again reaffirms its full support
for the IAEA and its work to monitor compliance with nuclear safeguards around the
world and the need to ensure that it has both the resources and authority to fulfill its job.
Nuclear security remains an essential and sensitive field that requires our full attention
in order to prevent, detect and respond adequately to acts and threats of nuclear terrorism.
Romania welcomes the unique value of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism (GICNT) within the global nuclear security architecture, in supporting
partners building national capabilities to combat terrorism.
Mr. Chairman,
Promoting and implementing the highest safety, security and non-proliferation standards
by all NPT States Parties is crucial for ensuring the safe use of nuclear energy. Romania
has demonstrated throughout the years a strong commitment to nuclear safety and has
significantly strengthened its regulatory framework for nuclear and radiation safety,
making important progress related to the management of radioactive waste and nuclear
spent fuel, a progress certified by the IAEA experts in 2017.
Mr. Chairman,
To conclude, let me recall that at the previous Preparatory Committee, there was a
general commitment to move forward and to strengthen the Treaty. In order to advance
on all three pillars and to strengthen the global nonproliferation regime, it lies in our
collective responsibility to display a constructive and balanced approach in addressing
the current challenges. Bridging political differences is in the interest of the Treaty and
of us all.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
