Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first to extend to you the most sincere congratulations for your appointment as Chairman of this Preparatory Committee and to assure you of the Romanian delegation's full support.
Romania fully endorses the statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I would like to limit the statement to a few brief points of national relevance.
Romania is firmly convinced that the NPT remains one of the pillars of international security and the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. At the 40th Anniversary of the Treaty, we believe that its future viability relies on the full implementation of obligations assumed by all States Parties as well as on the process of achieving its universality.
Romania remains a strong promoter of a balanced approach to NPT. It continues to fully support the efforts undertaken by the international community towards the elimination of nuclear weapons, to act in line with its non-proliferation policy and commitments undertaken, and to support strongly the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
One initiative aiming at fostering this balanced approach to NPT is the Seven Nation Initiative in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. As you may recall, in 2005 in the context of the United Nations Summit, at the initiative of Norway, Romania together with Australia, Chile, Indonesia, South Africa and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland put forward proposals aiming at building a broad consensus on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In the aftermath of the 2005 UN Summit, a number of concrete initiatives and activities were further promoted under the Seven Nation Initiative.
Among them, Romania, in partnership with Norway, organized an international seminar entitled "How can the Black Sea Region contribute to improved global security?", in Bucharest, on 7 - 9 June 2007. This event proved to be yet another opportunity to reaffirm the key role of sub-regional cooperation in responding to the multifaceted nature of proliferation, and to identify options for fostering the synergies among States in our region, aimed at curbing and preventing the WMD proliferation in the Black Sea area. The seminar also generated ideas on how to expand multilateral and inter-agency coordination as an important means of addressing the proliferation threat in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
Mr. Chairman,
In view of recent challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation regime, Romania has taken every opportunity, at bilateral and multilateral level, to emphasize the importance of the observance of the nuclear non-proliferation commitments undertaken by all States Parties to the NPT. From this perspective, Romania continues to underline the necessity of strengthening the IAEA Safeguards System.
Starting with 1 June 2007, following the IAEA Broader Conclusion in respect to the Additional Protocol, Romania has begun the implementation of integrated safeguards. Up until now, this system has been implemented at Cernavoda Nuclear Power Plant and Nuclear Fuel Factory, and will further be applied at Feldioara Power Plant.
In line with its non-proliferation policy and commitments undertaken, Romania proceeded to implement the "Gradual Complete Conversion from Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) to Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) fuel project of the TRIGA - Pitesti research reactor", a project developed by the Institute for Nuclear Research (ICN) Pitesti, in cooperation with the IAEA and United States of America. This activity started in 1992, entailed several stages and was completed in 2006.
The 14 MW TRIGA Nuclear Research Reactor in Pitesti is the most powerful TRIGA Research Reactor converted in the world and it is mainly used for experimental investigations on the Romanian nuclear fuels produced for Cernavoda Nuclear Power Plant. After several years of cooling, the irradiated U.S.-origin Highly Enriched Uranium which has been removed from the Pitesti reactor, will be shipped to the U.S. under the Foreign Research Reactor Spent Fuel Program for Romania. Fulfilling of this task will be a significant contribution to the Reduced Enrichment for Research and Test Reactors (RERTR) Program of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative (GTRI), whose objective is to reduce and eliminate the use and storage of Highly Enriched Uranium in civil nuclear activities. The three parties of the contract (IAEA, CERCA - Company for the Design and Fabrication of Atomic Fuel - and Romania) developed a strong relationship and increased mutual understanding throughout the project and all benefited and learned from the experience. This is one of the most successful examples to date of an international partnership to convert research reactors under the Global Threat Reduction Initiative.
