Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the International Organizations in Vienna Unofficial translation STATEMENT BY MIKHAIL I. ULIYANOV HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR SECURITY AFFAIRS AND DISARMAMENT At the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference Vienna, 30 April 2012 Mr Chair, First of all, allow me to assure you that the delegation of the Russian Federation is willing to provide support to you throughout the session of the Preparatory Committee for the 20 15 NPT Review Conference. Strengthening the NPT and the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a whole is a foreign policy priority of Russia. Therefore, we attach particular importance to attaining the highest possible effectiveness of the NPT review process. We are facing a massive task of putting the significant and important outcomes of the previous review process into practice in a balanced manner. The NPT is the cornerstone of international nuclear non-proliferation regime. For many years the Treaty has served as a kamework for a solid network of effective mechanisms for restricting the spread of nuclear weapons and sensitive nuclear materials. Mr Chair, We are convinced that continuous and balanced implementation and enhancement of the Treaty objectively meet the interests of all countries. We expect that during this review cycle as during the previous one we will be able to work out, by virtue of constructive collaboration among all delegations, "next" balanced package of measures to strengthen the Treaty and will achieve such results which will be conducive to the consolidation of international efforts aimed at using the potential of the Treaty intensively with a view to preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and ensuring disarmament and peaceful nuclear cooperation. Mr Chair, In 201 1 the Russia-US Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms came into force. It was concluded for a period of ten years to replace the Strategic Arms Reductions Treaty and the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty. As it was stated by the President of Russia, 3 with the conclusion of the new Treaty "both sides have won by improving their security, and this victory is also a victory for the global community". Global events analysis shows the utmost need to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime comprehensively. The danger of nuclear materials falling into the hands of terrorists, the emergence of clandestine proliferation networks and the growth of "black markets" in nuclear materials are very alarming. An equally difficult task is to create such architecture of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy that would be a means of reducing the risks of the spread of sensitive technologies around the world with scrupulous respect for the rights of the States conscientiously fulfilling their non-proliferation commitments to satisfy their legitimate energy needs using atomic energy. Regional challenges affecting the nuclear non-proliferation regime require constant attention and should be handled as soon as possible through political and diplomatic means on the basis of proactive efforts of all the stakeholders. Mr Chair, We are convinced that contemporary nuclear non-proliferation challenges can and should be coped with on the basis of the NPT and the inviolability of its provisions, in strict compliance with international law and taking into account the legitimate interests of all States in terms of security and development. A lot of work still has to be done to ensure that the non-proliferation requirements enshrined in the Treaty are respected everywhere. Such work will imply broad political consultations and hard decisions to be made during negotiations. The UNSC Summit on non-proliferation and disarmament, held in September 2009, the UNSC meeting, held in April this year, as well as the nuclear security summits, held in Washington in 201 0 and in Seoul in 20 12, were important landmarks in enhancing non-proliferation and disarmament. In the next two weeks we are to prepare ourselves for the beginning of a substantive work towards an improved package of measures aimed at strengthening 4 the NPT. First of all, we should adopt the agenda. Hopefully, we will be able to do it as soon as possible in order to proceed to discussing substantive issues. We need to create favourable conditions for further disarmament process and involvement of all States without any exceptions in that process. We are ready to work towards wider nuclear-weapons-free zones. In 201 1 Russia ratified Protocols I and I1 to the African Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone Treaty. It is important that we should make joint efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation regime in the Middle East, as well as to increase the effectiveness of mechanisms for countering nuclear terrorism. I would like to make special comments concerning implementation of the 1995 resolution on the establishment of a zone free of WMD and means of their delivery in the Middle East. In our view, since the 2010 NPT Conference, significant progress has been made towards that objective. We believe that it is important to make further efforts in that area. We will elaborate on this topic when making a separate statement on cluster 2 issues. Mr Chair, We have concrete ideas and proposals on how the NPT could be developed and enhanced in future. They will be put forward in next statements. Mr Chair, The NPT Review Conference is the very forum for sending international community a strong political signal of the united stance of all the States Parties to the NPT in their support of the Treaty and readiness to adhere precisely to their commitments under the Treaty. To fulfill this ambitious and massive task the participants of the Conference need to cooperate actively. Implementing the Treaty consistently, Russia aims at making a substantial contribution to the work done to achieve noble goals envisaged in the NPT, so we encourage all States to pursue constructive interaction for the sake of our common and safe future. Thank You. 