IlocTO.HHHOe I1pe,n:cTaBI1TeJibCTBO
Pocc11i1cKoi1 <De,n:epa11,111-1
rrpH OT,n:eneH1-11-1 OOH 1-1 ,n:pyr1-1x
Me)K)J.yttapo,D.HbIX opraHH3ar.urnx
B )KeHeBe
STATEMENT
Perman ent Mission
of the Russian Federat ion
to the United Nations Office
and other International
Organizations in Geneva
by Director General Vladimir Yermakov
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
at the Second Session
of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, April 24, 2018 
Statement of the Russian deleg ation
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the NPT Review Conference
Mr. Chairman,
Dear colleagues,
2
In a couple of months the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) will mark the 50th anniversary since its opening for signature. For
five decades the NPT has played a crucial role in establishing and cementing the
international legal architecture of disarmament and non-proliferation, which has
allowed to effectively prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons for many years.
We fully align ourselves with the key assessments made by the delegation of
China.
Let us have a look where we are in the lead-up to this anniversary . To be
honest, the current international situation is challenging. The threat of armed
conflicts in different regions of the world even with the involvement of nuclear
weapons is growing. We observe that collective cooperation mechanisms are
renounced and the authority of international organizations is undermined .
Traditional dialogue, respect for positions and interests of each other and
understanding the need for compromise are being replaced by some s01i of
aggressive radicalism and maximalism not based on common sense at all. We are
unpleasantly surprised that suddenly many states easily abandon their traditional
deep analysis of the situation and scrupulous assessment of short-term and longterm
consequences. Some of our Western colleagues have gone so far as to even
claim in their statements that Russia, allegedly, does not meet some of its
obligations on international agreements. One cannot but understand that such
absolutely ground less and, to be blunt, false statements increase international
tensions, fuel distrust among states and destabilize existing legal mechanisms. 
3
In such conditions, there is a critical demand for sustained collective efforts
aimed at ensuring security and stability in the world, restoration of trust and
convergence of positions of different groups of countries. The healthier
international environment is possible only on the basis of traditional approved
mechanisms that have confirmed their effectiveness and reliability for many years
of existence. The establishment of any new politicized formats just provokes a
growth in distrust and suspicions between states.
The NPT has been tested by time. It rests on the balance of interests of
different States. The Treaty in its advanced sound age remains fully relevant. The
NPT is absolute ly in line with the objectives set at its conclusion. The NPT basic
principles provide a solid foundation for settlement of the most complicated
problems in the area of nuclear non-proliferation.
And the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the Iran's nuclear
program concluded in 2015 is a bright confirmation of that. The agreement reached
between E3/EU+3 and Iran through the EU mediation is a unique combination of
measures developed within the existing framework of the time-tested UN Security
Council and the IAEA mechanisms, and additional voluntary steps of the states parties
to the deal. As a result the JCPOA gives full confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iran's nuclear. program while ensuring its inherent right to
the development of a civil nuclear program . The Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and the Additional Protocol implemented by Iran provide the Agency
with a timeless possibility to monitor, verify and confirm the absence in Iran of
any undeclared nuclear material or activity. The IAEA on a regular basis confirms
Iran 's full compliance with its relevant obligation s.
The JCPOA is quite a fragile compromise. Any deviation from its general
philosophy or breach or non-compliance with its provisions as well as any attempts
to amend its text for someone's benefit will inevitably affect the global nonproliferation
regime and have a powerful negative consequences for regional and
global stability and security. 
4
We strongly insist that continuing faithful and comprehensive
implementation of the JCPOA and the UN Security Council resolution 2231 by all
states - parties to the nuclear deal without exception meet the interests of the entire
global community. For our part, we will continue to comply with our JCPOA
commitments as long as the others do so. We are confident that our analysis and
assessments are shared by most of the states. And today we call on our colleagues
in this hall not to keep silence in a hope that the situation will somehow blow over
but make specific serious efforts to preserve the JCPOA .
We, together with the delegation of China, have prepared a draft Joint
Statement aimed at voicing our support for the JCPOA that we propose to adopt at
this session. The delegations have already had a chance to go through the
document. We believe that there is a demand for such a collective message by the
Preparatory Committee and hope that the document will find broad support.
The developments around the JCPOA will directly influence any outcome of
the efforts to settle the nuclear problem of the Korean Peninsula through
diplomatic means . The breach of the JCPOA without any reasons and against the
will of the international community would hardly add to the confidence of the
DPRK that any potential future agreements would be observed. We follow with
cautious optimism the recent positive developments on the Korean Peninsula,
including a number of highest-level contacts with the participation of Pyongyang
and recent declarations by the DPRK on suspension of nuclear tests and test launches
of intercontinental ballistic missiles. We welcome such steps.
Russia never recognized the DPRK ambitions to acquire a nuclear status.
We consider unacceptable any DPRK in compliance with the relevant UN Security
Council resolutions. However, we should not turn a blind eye to the obvious: the
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is possible only with reaching a complex
solution to all security issues in North-East Asia, including the growing problem of
building-up the U.S. missile defence system capabilities. Some time ago Russia
and China put forward a joint initiative with a step-by-step moving plan towards 
5
this goal. We believe that m the current circumstances the elements of this
initiative are relevant and worth considering. We will continue to provide
comprehensive support to any political and diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated
diplomatic solution to the situation on the Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Chairman,
We are convinced that international community efforts in the area of nuclear
disarmament should be focused at this stage on creation of prerequisites for further
steps in this sphere. We draw your attention once again to the need to engage all
the states possessing military nuclear capabilities in the work to reduce and limit
nuclear weapons .
Russia calls on all the members of the international community to be proactive
in solving the relevant problems of international security and stability.
Among them are an unrestricted deployment of global missile defence systems,
development of non-nuclear high-precision strategic offensive weapons, a prospect
of placing strike weapons in outer space and growing quality and quantity
imbalances in the sphere of conventional arms. As these issues are not being
settled it destroys trust between states, destabilizes disarmament architecture and is
becoming a more and more serious obstacle on the way of promoting disarmament
efforts.
We would like to draw special attention to the decision taken by Washington
to renounce the policy of supporting the ratification of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and create conditions to resume nuclear tests.
These actions by the U.S. represent a serious blow to the CTBT and create an
extremely worrying situation in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. It should be
understood that if the example of Washington could be followed by other states
which ratification is required for the CTBT entry into force , that will pave the way
for an unrestricted nuclear arms race.
We reaffirm our commitment to the INF Treaty. We share the concerns
voiced by a number of states regarding the future of the Treaty. However, it seems 
6
that only few of them know the real state of play. The U.S. continues to reproduce
its unsubstantiated allegations. While the fact that the US has been severely
violating for many years the INF Treaty and trying to justify its intention to destroy
it by shifting responsibility on Russia is being silenced. We would like to believe
that chances to save the INF Treaty are still there and the U.S. will be strong
enough to show political will needed.
In this context we consider attempts to focus the disarmament process on
unconditional abolition of nuclear arsenals as soon as possible to be premature and
disorienting. There is no way to reach the goal of building a world free of nuclear
weapons by the methods that formed the basis of the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, which now is open for signature. This initiative makes no
contribution to the advancement towards the noble goal declared. Quite on the
contrary it threatens the very existence and efficiency of our fundamental NonProliferation
Treaty.
We stand for inviolability of the provisions of Article VI of the NPT in
correlation with the respective parts of the Treaty's preamble. Let us recall what
they provide for in essence : the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons, the
elimination of all their existing stockpiles, and the removal of nuclear weapons and
their means of delivery from national arsenals cannot be ensured separately from
efforts to conclude a Treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective inte1national control.
Mr. Chairman,
The system of the IAEA safeguards is the cornerstone of the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime. The confidence of the member states in the IAEA
safeguards system is the key factor that ensures sustainability of the nuclear nonproliferation
regime.
Russia supports gradual improvement of the IAEA verification mechanism.
Any modifications are justified only if the safeguards system remains objective,
depoliticized, technically credible, clear to the member states and based on rights 
7
and obligations of the parties in accordance with the safeguards agreements signed
by them. We stress that introduction of any subjective and politicized elements in
the IAEA verification mechanism would inevitably undermine its sustainability
and lead to erosion of the fundamental principle of non-interference into domestic
affairs of states, which could ultimately have unpredictable consequences both for
the safeguards system and the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a whole.
Introduction of the State-Leve l Concept to safeguards still requires close
political control by the IAEA member states through the Agency's policy-making
bodies in order to avoid introduction of any subjective elements in its verification
activities.
Mr. Chairman,
We have to state that we are reaching the middle of the NPT review cycle
with zero result as regards such an important track as establishment of a Middle
East zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
systems (WMDFZ). Further inaction in that area threatens to undermine the
confidence of states in the NPT. We still believe that convening a WMDFZ
Conference remains a highly relevant and achievable goal in the context of
implement ation of the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East. We cannot further
procrastinate with preparation of this event. Proposals presented by Russia at the
first session of the Preparatory Committee in 2017 on structuring the work on this
track could serve as a good basis for adoption of a decision at the 2020 Review
Conference to convene a Conference.
We consider that the unpreparedness of South-East Asia states to finalize the
work in 2012 on signing the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty that would provide
security assurances to members of the zone was a lost opportunity. Russia is open
for consultations with countries of the region on the matter.
We attribute great importance to final formalization of the status of NWFZs
m Central Asia and in Africa and call on the U.S. to expeditiously ratify the
Protocols to the Semipalatinsk Treaty and the Treaty of Pelindaba. 
8
Mr. Chairman,
We are confident that strengthening the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime is only possible if three key elements of the Treaty are implemented in a
balanced manner - nuclear non-proliferation, peaceful use of nuclear energy and
nuclear disarmament. Unfortunately, while focusing far too often on the complex
and controversial issues of non-proliferation and disarmament, we tend to forget
about the peaceful use of nuclear energy - the most consolidating and prospective
pillar of the NPT that is relevant to achievement of the development tasks for all
member countries.
According to the IAEA estimates, the use of nuclear energy will increase
globally, which demonstrates a derriand for it and important role in the energy mix
of many states. Approximately 450 nuclear power plant units operate in the world
while 55 more are at the stage of construction. There is a growing interest in the
development of technical cooperation projects and non-energy application of
nuclear technologies.
Russia is one of the most active participants in international cooperation in
the field of peaceful use of nuclear energy. The State Corporation «Rosatom» is
currently implementing abroad 33 nuclear projects on power plant units
construction. At the same time, as already stressed by the President of the Russian
Federation, our country not only sells equipment for nuclear power plants - we
develop a whole new industry for our partners including training of national
specialists.
Russia has always fulfilled and will fulfill its obligations under bilateral and
multilateral treaties and projects regardless of political developments. We stand
ready to continue cooperation with the NPT member states and are determined to
develop a genuinely modern and mutually beneficial interaction system in the field
of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman, 
9
Careful treatment of the NPT, as well as responsible approach to the balance
of interests enshrined in it and obligations taken by all are key to successful
implementation of the Treaty . We believe that reaffirming these principles as well
as the enduring importance of the Treaty and its crucial historical value is the
minimum of what we all should absolutely do during this NPT review cycle. This
would be particularly important given the fact that the year 2020 will mark the
50th anniversary of the NPT coming into force.
We stand ready to cooperate with all states in the interests of effective work
of cmTent session.
Thank you for your attention. 