Mr. Chairman,
First of all, let me read aloud a welcoming address by President of the Russian Federation Dmitry Medvedev to the participants and guests of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
"I am pleased to welcome all the participants and guests of the Conference.
The comprehensive task you are tackling with, related to elaborating a set of agreed and feasible measures on the basis of a true balance between the three NPT pillars: non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses of atomic energy, is of outmost importance for ensuring the strategic stability and security.
Differing, sometimes polar, views on and approaches to the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free world order have been successfully combined within the NPT for a long time. It is extremely important to raise the level of trust in international politics to confront jointly emerging proliferation challenges and threats, alleviating them, first of all, on the basis of the NPT. This makes this VIII NPT Review Conference ever more relevant.
Russia is striving to contribute tangibly to achieving noble objectives of the Treaty by consistently fulfilling its provisions. One more illustration of that is the recently concluded Treaty between the United States of America and the Russian Federation on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. This document vividly demonstrates to the international community the potential of constructive cooperation and opportunities for furthering disarmament.
"The peaceful atom" is playing the growing role in satisfying energy demand of the world economy. Existing and future nuclear power plants are instrumental to the economic growth, raising living standards of the millions of people. Along with that, the NPT States Parties will have to give an adequate
response to the proliferation risks related to exercising by States their inalienable rights for peaceful uses of atomic energy.
The determination of international community to improve protection mechanisms of nuclear security is of outmost importance. This was proved by the outcomes of .the Washington summit in April. Acting in line with the decisions made there, Russia is ready to share its extensive experience in this sphere with States, which are responsible in fulfilling their relevant international and legal obligations. We are looking forward to closely cooperating in creating truly modem and proliferation-resistant architecture of cooperation in the sphere of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, based on the IAEA safeguards and multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle.
I hope that the decisions and initiatives elaborated at your Conference will be helpful to further strengthening nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime and will contribute to broadening the international dialogue in this sphere.
I wish you all have fruitful deliberations and further success in improving and strengthening the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. Dmitry Medvedev".
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT Review Conference is expected to review the functioning of the non-proliferation regime over the last five years and to define the main ways to further strengthen the Treaty as a cornerstone of international security.
The Russian delegation has come to New York with a firm conviction that the consistent implementation and enhancement of the Treaty impartially meet the interests of all countries. We hope that due to constructive cooperation we will be able to achieve the results promoting consolidation of international efforts to fully exploit the potential of the Treaty in the interests of preventing
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, disarmament and peaceful nuclear cooperation.
Mi*. Chairman,
Obviously, the spirit of the Conference will be mostly determined by the current political climate in the area of international security.
Just recently Russia and the U.S. have signed the Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms. It was concluded as a follow-up to the START and the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions for ten years. As the President of Russia put it, in this new Treaty "both Parties won, as they strengthened their security and with the regard of our victory the whole world community has gained".
The analysis of recent developments in the world shows that the comprehensive strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime has become now ever more relevant. Of course, the danger of nuclear materials falling into the hands of terrorists, as well as emergence of clandestine proliferation networks and black market of nuclear materials are of major concern. No less an important task is the need to seek the establishment of such an architecture of international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy that would reduce risks of spreading sensitive technologies in the world while ensuring the observance of the rights of the States complying with their non-proliferation obligations to meet their legitimate energy needs.
Regional challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation regime should remain in focus and require an early politico-diplomatic settlement through active efforts of all the parties concerned.
Mr. Chairman,
We are convinced that current challenges in the field of nuclear non-proliferation can and must be addressed on the basis of the NPT by fully proceeding from the inviolability of its provisions, strictly abiding by the norms of international law and with due regard for all States' legitimate security and development interests. Much work is still to be done to ensure the universal compliance with the Treaty non-proliferation requirements. This work will require extensive political consultations and difficult decisions in the course of negotiations.
We believe that the Conference along with the UN Security Council Summit on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament held in September 2009 and the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington will become important milestones in this process.
. Our common task for the forthcoming month is to work out decisions that would reaffirm the role of the Treaty as the proper basis for addressing the current challenges and threats to non-proliferation, determine the instruments for improvement and universalization of the IAEA's safeguards system, facilitate the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and give an impetus to launching negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament on a treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons.
It is necessary to create conducive atmosphere for furthering the disarmament process and engaging all States without any exception. We are ready to pursue the expansion of the area of the Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and strengthening of the non-proliferation regime in the Middle East, as well as to enhance the efficiency of the mechanisms aimed at combating nuclear terrorism. In the final documents of the Conference, it is crucial to fix optimal ways for further development of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Mr. Chairman,
As an NPT State Party and a Depositary, the Russian Federation consistently complies with its obligations and reaffirms its strong and
continuous support for the Treaty. Our national report, which will be circulated during the Conference, will allow each delegation to familiarize with all endeavors undertaken by our country for the past five years to implement the Articles of the Treaty.
I would like to stress that Russia came to the Conference duly prepared. We brought concrete ideas and proposals for possible ways to further develop and strengthen the NPT. We shall outline them in our statements as well as in working papers prepared jointly with other States Parties and dealing with such issues as disarmament, sustainable development of the atomic energy, multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle and prevention of abuse of rights provided for under Article X of the NPT.
We would like to touch upon separately the issue of implementation of the 1995 Resolution on the establishment of a zone free from weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We share the concerns of many States related to the implementation of the provisions of this Resolution. It is in this context that at the third session of the Preparatory Committee to the Conference we put forward several ideas which, in our view,
can contribute to a substantial progress in the implementation of this Resolution.
I would note that our ideas mean an invitation to constructive and engaged discussions rather than a cure-all solution to all the problems we face.
Mr. Chairman,
The Review Conference is the right venue to send a strong political signal to the international community showing solidarity of all NPT States Parties in their support for the Treaty norms and their willingness to fulfill accurately their obligations under it. The ambitiousness and immensity of this task require a high level of interaction between all participants in the Conference.
Thank you for your attention.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 5







Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



