lloCT051HHOe
llpe~CTaBHTellbCTBO
PoccHMCKOM¢e~epauHH
npH OpraHH3aUHH
06oe~HHeHHbiX HaUHM
B HoiO-HopKe
STATEMENT
by
Mikhail I. Uliyanov
Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations
in New York
Unofficial translation
Check against delivery
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
at the first third session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
(general debate)
New York, 29 April2014 
2
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is rightly regarded as a cornerstone of the global strategic
stability and security. It laid a foundation for nuclear disarmament, prevention
of horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons and productive international
cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Had it not been for
the political shrewdness of our predecessors who signed the NPT more than
four decades ago, the international relations of today would look different, and
- I dare assume - our world would be far less secure and less stable. One could
point out to certain shortcomings of the regime established by the NPT and yet,
it's impossible to deny that the Treaty meets the fundamental interests of all
States Parties. Therefore, our common goal is to treat the NPT with care and
collectively respond to the challenges it faces. That is the principal objective of
the forthcoming Review Conference to be held in a year. The Action Plan
agreed in 2010 is a solid stepping stone in this work.
Mr. Chairman,
·Russia fully recognizes its responsibilities under the NPT, including
Article VI. Allegations are not rare that this article is not observed at all or is
only observed in an unsatisfactory manner. How solid are the grounds for such
allegations? See for yourselves. Article VI of the NPT contains three specific
obligations. Firstly, cease the nuclear arms race. This requirement was fulfilled
as far back as three decades ago. Secondly, it provides for nuclear disarmament
negotiations. Such negotiations did take place and were repeatedly held by the
two leading nuclear powers. As a result of the implementation of a whole range
of the agreements reached, Russia's strategic nuclear arsenals have decreased
by more than 80% and non-strategic arsenals- by 75% over the last 25 years.
Someone would probably wish for an even more spectacular progress, but you 
3
should agree that any talks about stagnation, let alone total lack of any
movement towards a global nuclear zero would mean distorting the truth. As a
matter of fact, the current level of Russia's nuclear potential is significantly
lower that that of the period when the NPT entered into force. Therefore, Article
VI really works and will continue to do so, given the progress in the
implementation of the new START Treaty between Russia and the United
States. The situation is different only regarding the third obligation under
Article VI, i.e. the negotiations on a treaty on general and complete
disarmament. Over more than four decades, the NPT States Parties have failed
to make a single step forward in this area. Moreover, this obligation is often
forgotten. Indeed, something needs to be done in this regard. Thus, we believe
that one of the objectives of the NPT Review Process is to reaffirm the
comprehensive and indivisible nature of the NPT obligations of all its Parties.
Any attempts to raise the issue of tradeoffs and linkages within the NPT, or
oppose nuclear and non-nuclear States are detrimental to the stability of the
non-proliferation regime and might result in it losing its efficiency.
At this stage, one of the major challenges to the non-proliferation regime
1s the extremely unsatisfactory situation with regard to convening the
Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction as well as its means of delivery. In
spite of the decisions of the previous Review Conference, this event was not
held in 2012. Moreover, a new date for it has not been agreed upon. It
inevitably causes disappointment and raises concerns.
As one of the co-sponsors of the Conference, Russia has been sparing no
effort and will continue to do so in order to implement the relevant part of the
2010 Action Plan. We are looking forward to further working in close contact
with the other co-sponsors and facilitator Mr. Jaakko Laajava and we highly 
4
appreciate this cooperation. We intend to cooperate closely with all the
countries of the Middle East whose support is essential for achieving success.
Although the current state of affairs is in general terms unsatisfactory, we
should note that since the second session of the Preparatory Committee quite
important results have been achieved in this field. I refer to the three informal
meetings in Glion attended by the Middle Eastern States that managed for the
first time to establish a direct dialogue. Although this dialogue is moving
forward with many difficulties, it is encouraging that all its participants - I
would like to stress that - all of them have repeatedly shown that they are ready
to stand for their principle approaches while taking into account the positions of
the partners and searching for acceptable compromises. It gives some ground
for optimism, and allows us, in our view, to make a decision about holding this
Conference in November, or December this year. We are confident, that if the
participants of the process have enough political will, we will be able to
successfully complete the necessary preparatory wok, agree on the agenda,
modalities and a draft outcome document for the Conference during the
remaining time.
We consider the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZs) as
an important tool for raising the level of regional and international security and
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Extending such zones to new
geographic areas is important as it provides legally binding security assurances
to non-nuclear weapon States.
We welcome the efforts of the Central Asia and the P5 countries, which
brought us close to the signing of the Protocol to the Treaty on a NuclearWeapon-Free
Zone in Central Asia. Together with other P5 countries we intend
to sign the Protocol as soon as possible thus making an important step towards
completing the international legal process of establishing a NWFZ in Central 
5
Asia.
We are satisfied that we have managed to achieve the final stage in
legally formalizing the status of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Southeast
Asia. The P5 has done its part of the work, making all the efforts for earliest
signing of the Protocol to the Treaty on a NWFZ in Southeast Asia.
Mr. Chairman,
We assume that the main work on strengthening the non-proliferation
regime is done at the national level by the NPT States Parties themselves. At the
same time, it is always possible to achieve even more by means of joint efforts
through exchange of information and best practices. This is where the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has a key role to play.
The Russian Federation has consistently supported the IAEA's activities,
including through providing adequate resources for its functioning and supports
further strengthening of its potential with due account for the wide scope of
tasks it is charged with related to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Under the IAEA Charter, the Agency's principal objective is to promote
the development of nuclear energy and its practical applications for peaceful
purposes. This objective is the foundation for all the other areas of the IAEA
activities, including its safeguards system. The non-proliferation dimension of
the IAEA's work is the key opening the door to all the benefits of the peaceful
atom for non-nuclear States. Therefore, we fully support the universalization of
the Additional Protocol to the Safeguards Agreement, while assuming that
accession to the Protocol is a completely voluntary measure.
Russia takes an active part in discussions of the safeguards system reform
that the IAEA Secretariat is working on. We consider objectivity and political
impartiality to be the foundation of the IAEA safeguards legitimacy. Therefore, 
6
the new approaches of the Agency's Secretariat should only use objective
country-specific facts whereas its conclusions should be based upon unbiased
and technically sound assessments. We believe that in the framework of the new
approaches to safeguards only those measures and procedures for verifying
nuclear activities of States should be used that are provided for in their
respective safeguards agreements. We stress that any changes in the IAEA
safeguards approaches can only be made after the approval by the Agency's
policy-making bodies.
Mr. Chairman,
We advocate further strengthening of the international legal norms
regulating the security of nuclear materials with a view to reducing the
proliferation threats and preventing terrorists from acquiring WMDs. We
emphasize the importance of universalization of the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the 2005 Amendment to it, as well as the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We
call upon all the States that have not yet done so to ratify these instruments.
We take note of the importance of combining efforts of the international
community to fight the threat of nuclear terrorism. To that end, in 2006 Russia
and the United States launched the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism (GICNT), which has proved to be an efficient tool for cooperating
and sharing best expertise with regard to countering the threat of nuclear
terrorism through action and reinforcing the global nuclear security, and which
now comprises 85 States.
Russia has consistently pursued the goal of the earliest entry into force
and the universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT), which is a crucial international legal instrument for strengthening the 
7
non-proliferation regime and limiting nuclear weapons.
We support the start of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty
(FMCT) at the Conference on Disarmament withiri the framework of the
balanced Programme of Work and on the basis of the Shannon Mandate.
Mr. Chairman,
We are of the view that resolving regional challenges to the nuclear nonproliferation
regime could be accomplished exclusively through political and
diplomatic means on the basis of the NPT and the IAEA safeguards system.
There is no alternative to this approach. It is attested by the fact that over the
past year we have advanced significantly in settling the situation around Iran's
nuclear programme. Right now the Joint Plan of Action agreed upon by the
E3+3 and Iran on November 24th, 2013 is being implemented consistently. In
parallel, Iran and the IAEA are actively cooperating in order to resolve all
outstanding issues the Agency raised with regard to Iran's nuclear programme.
We are confident that the unprecedentedly constructive cooperation of Iran with
the IAEA as well as with the E3+3 gives grounds to hope for a successful
outcome of the talks on a comprehensive solution to Iran's nuclear issue before
the deadline of July 20, as set for by the Geneva Joint Plan of Action.
Vigorous steps are required to start moving towards a nuclear-weaponfree
status of the Korean Peninsula. We are certain that all the stakeholders
should do their best to resume the full-fledged NPT membership ofDPRK and
restore the application of the IAEA safeguards on its territory.
Mr. Chairman,
An increased interest in peaceful uses of nuclear energy is an objective
trend of the modern world. Russia believes there is no alternative to further
development and increased use of the civil nuclear power in the world in the 
8
near future. This is proven by the outcomes of the 2013 High-Level
International Conference Nuclear Energy in the 2Ft Century hosted by Russia
under the IAEA auspices.
The final document of the Conference sets the direction for the
development of the IAEA Member States. We are satisfied with the main
conclusion of the Conference that for many countries nuclear energy is a
proved, pure, safe, and resource-efficient technology that will play a prominent
role in ensuring energy security and the sustainable development goals in the
21st century and beyond.
Russia consistently promotes a wide access to the benefits of peaceful
nuclear energy for the NPT States Parties as well as the development of
international cooperation in this area.
The NPT is a key element, a sort of guarantee of the ever-expanding
international cooperation in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Russia is willing to continue working together with the NPT States Parties. Our
vision of cooperation is that it should consist in attaining the goals of
development and spreading the use of peaceful nuclear energy while
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
To conclude, I would like to inform the esteemed delegations that in
pursuance of the relevant provisions of the 2010 Action Plan the NPT States
Parties possessing nuclear weapons agreed upon a standard reporting form. In
accordance with this form, Russia just as its other P5 partners, has prepared a
sort of a report on the work done with respect to Actions 5, 20 and 21 of the last
Review Conference Final Document. It will be placed on the official website of
the third session of the Preparatory Committee in the form of a statement by the
head of the Russian delegation.
Thank you. 