Interpreter/ Translator Ahmed Abdelmotaleb Page 0 of 3 المطلب عبد أحمد/ المترجم
Statement of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Before
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York - April 27 until May 23, 2015
Delivered By
H.E. Ambassador/ Abdallah Y. Al-Mouallimi
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
United Nations- New York
 Unofficial Translation
 Check against Delivery
Interpreter/ Translator Ahmed Abdelmotaleb Page 1 of 3 المطلب عبد أحمد/ المترجم
Mr. President,
It pleases me to start my statement by congratulating you on your election as President
of this Conference. I am confident that your diplomatic capabilities and extensive experience
will undoubtedly contribute to the success of the Conference and the achievement of its
objectives. Moreover, I stress the determination of the Delegation of my Country to cooperate
with you to ensure the success of your mission. In addition, the Delegation of my Country
aligns itself with the statements delivered by the Arab Group and the Non-Aligned Movement
Mr. President,
Emanating from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's commitment to the provisions of the UN
Charter and the principles of international legitimacy as fundamental pillars of its foreign
policy, it attaches special importance to strengthening the role of the United Nations in all
fields, particularly in relation to issues of international peace and security, and disarmament. It
is the Kingdom's belief that these issues are integral, and without which the world cannot live
in peace and stability. Accordingly, strengthening international peace and security approach
requires genuine political will and strong determination from all countries, particularly those
possessing nuclear weapons, in order to dispose of the reliance on nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction as instruments of national security.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses the importance of efforts dedicated to achieve the
goals of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction which requires that the entire
international community embraces the already existing treaties and legal and ethical
frameworks aiming to reach a nuclear-free world, especially in the Middle East region. The
security and stability of any region cannot be achieved through the possession of weapons of
mass destruction, but it can be achieved through cooperation and consultation between
countries; the pursuit of development and progress; and by avoiding the race to own this
devastating weapon. It is worth noting that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has recently 
Interpreter/ Translator Ahmed Abdelmotaleb Page 2 of 3 المطلب عبد أحمد/ المترجم
announced its support to the Vienna document on humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons.
Mr. President,
Despite the universality of the NPT, and that it is the cornerstone in building the
international system of disarmament and non-proliferation, international efforts within the
multilateral framework remain below the aspired level. This makes the political landscape
fraught with ambiguity.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes with certainty that the current stall of the
situation will lead to a much more difficult situation; as the lack of any tangible progress in the
implementation of the decision to make the Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons may
lead towards a nuclear arms' race.
Mr. President,
Emanating from the position of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia aiming to make the
Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, the Kingdom expresses its deep
disappointment that the conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which was supposed to be held in Helsinki,
Finland by the end of 2012, has not been convened because of Israel's refusal. It's really
unfortunate that international consensus, and a regional urgent desire to make the Middle East
a zone free of nuclear weapons, have been thwarted by Israel which prevents the desire of the
peoples of the region to live in a zone free of nuclear terror.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is of the view that it is imperative that the states do not
experience any doubts or concerns about the wisdom of accepting an infinite extension of the
NPT treaty, or even the accession to it. These concerns will keep increasing as long as Israel
remains a non-signatory to the treaty.
Interpreter/ Translator Ahmed Abdelmotaleb Page 3 of 3 المطلب عبد أحمد/ المترجم
Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia hopes that the framework agreement that was reached in
the city of Lausanne, Switzerland between the major powers and Iran over its nuclear program
leads to a final binding agreement that strengthens security and stability in the region and the
world; assures the countries in the region and the international community; and that Iran
adheres to the principles of good neighborliness, non-interference in the internal affairs of Arab
countries, and respects their sovereignty. The Kingdom reaffirms the inherent right of the states
of the region to peaceful use of nuclear energy in accordance with the standards and guidelines
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and under its supervision.
Mr. President,
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has declared its intention to develop an ambitious
program to exploit nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to achieve the goals of sustainable
development, and to preserve valuable hydrocarbon resources for future generations. This is
entirely consistent with nuclear security requirements and meets the maximum standards set by
the guiding criteria of the International Atomic Energy Agency in the planning, construction,
and operation stages. Moreover, the Kingdom is committed to the establishment of a national
system of accounting oversight and control of nuclear materials; and to make every effort in
the development of customs and border control devices and all law enforcement agencies to
detect and prevent illegal trafficking in hazardous materials.
In conclusion Mr. President,
The Government of my country can only reaffirm that the elimination of nuclear
weapons is the certain guarantee against the threat of their use. In addition, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is of the view to seriously address the concerns of many non-nuclear-weapon
states in light of the continuity of instability in the Middle East; and growing risks resulting
from recent events in the region through the development of a binding international instrument 
Interpreter/ Translator Ahmed Abdelmotaleb Page 4 of 3 المطلب عبد أحمد/ المترجم
which should ensure the safety and stability of non-nuclear-weapon states and the entire
elimination of the weapons of nuclear-weapon states.
 Thank you Mr. President.