Mr. President,
Members of the Esteemed Delegations;
The Delegation of my Country is pleased to extend to Your Excellency its sincere congratulations on presiding over this important conference, which demonstrates your stature and the significance of your friendly country, the Philippines. We are confident that your ability and competence will contribute to the success of this meeting.
The Delegation of my Country emphasizes that this Treaty is the cornerstone of the nonproliferation regime to which we all aspire to achieve in a spirit of cooperation and justice; and that this Review Conference includes follow-up on implementation of the Treaty and the contents of the resolutions and decisions previously adopted by previous review conferences in 1995 and 2000. Today, the International Community, more than ever, is required to work towards achieving the universal adoption of the Treaty. We will make every possible effort to agree on a plan of action for achieving universality of the Treaty through the accession of the States Non-Parties to the Treaty without conditions, and placement of all their nuclear facilities under the Agency's comprehensive safeguards. In this context, we note that failure to pressure Israel into an immediate compliance would lead to more threats to the Middle East's security and stability; and might involve the region in a nuclear arms' race the world is keen to prevent!
In a previous preparatory meeting held in Geneva, Saudi Arabia submitted a report, adopted as official document NPT/Conf.2005/pc.l 1/30, on the steps needed to promote the establishment of a Nuclear-Free Zone in the Middle East; in response to what was stipulated in Part I of The Concluding Document of the Sixth Review Conference of States Parties to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 2000. The Government of my Country continues to emphasize the concerns included in contents of this report, topped by the establishment of a Nuclear-Free Zone in the Middle East which was adopted by the General Assembly from 1974 until now. Actually, it was adopted by consensus since 1980 (during the 35th session). Whereas the security and stability in any region cannot be achieved through the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, it should rather be achieved by cooperation and communication between States, by the pursuit of development and progress and by avoiding race to possess this horrible weapon. Hence, Israel's possession of nuclear weapons is a fundamental obstacle to achieving security and stability in the region. Accordingly, all justifications for Israel's acquisition and development of weapons of mass destruction - particularly nuclear weapons - is a clear and frank contradiction of all Israel's claims about the desire for establishing peace with the peoples and countries of the region. Our expectation is that this Conference requests from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency to follow up on the resolution on "The Israeli Nuclear Capabilities" adopted last September as document GC(53)/RES/17; and provide progress reports to the Agency's Board of Governors about its implementation; in conjunction with the Agency's reduction in the level of technology programmes offered to Israel in the nuclear field until its accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Mr. President\
My Country showed on several occasions its swift response to any initiatives that would achieve international peace and stability. It submitted its report to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 on the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. This report was prepared in accordance with the provisions of the fourth paragraph of the mentioned resolution and was adopted as the official document S/AC.44/2004 /(02)/65. Moreover, the Kingdom plans to conduct a regional workshop to implement the Security Council resolution 1540 in cooperation with the relevant United Nations Security Council Committee. In this context, The Kingdom has recently ratified the Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency, confirming by this action the inherent right of all States Parties to the Treaty to possess and develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes; and not accepting any attempt to reinterpret any of the articles of the Treaty that might lead to restricting or limiting this right. Accordingly, the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques decreed the establishment of King Abdullah City for Atomic and Renewable Energy to oversee the peaceful uses of nuclear and renewable energy in the Kingdom. Article IV of the City's regulations stipulates that it is "the competent Authority in charge of fulfilling national obligations towards all treaties and agreements regarding the nuclear and renewable energy to which the Kingdom is, or will be, a signatory. The City is also mandated to supervise, monitor and control all usages of atomic energy and the resulting radioactive waste".
Mr. President,
My Government follows on the stumbling negotiations between the group of six (5+1) and Iran over Iran's nuclear program and it causes our concern. On the other hand, it is important to encourage the Iranian side to continue to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency in order to make the Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass destruction. This can only be achieved through cooperation and transparency. The Government of my Country hopes that Iran will continue its constructive cooperation and move forward in this direction by taking a positive step in the right direction towards achieving security and stability in the region, which is part of the International Security and Stability system. Meanwhile, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia avails itself of this opportunity to commend the success of the Washington Summit on Nuclear Security, as well as supporting the Summit's Final Communique and Plan of Action.Mr. President,
In conclusion, my Government reaffirms that the elimination of nuclear weapons is the ultimate guarantee against their use or threat of use. Moreover, the Kingdom calls to seriously consider the concerns of many non-nuclear-weapon states, in the continuing absence of stability in the Middle East and the increasing risks resulting from the recent events in the region, by drafting a binding international instrument that ensures the safety and stability of States that do not possess nuclear weapons and the implementation of commitments. Nuclear-weapon States should remove their entire stock of nuclear weapons and implement their obligations under the provisions of Article VI of the Treaty and the implementation of the thirteen steps adopted in the concluding document of the Review Conference of 2000;
And Thank You Mr. President










'MmmzmmBM
» — ....
Permanent Mission Of The Kingdom

Permanent Mission Of The Kingdom	W	"^^W^WBWM



Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



