Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this important meeting, We are confident that with your diplomatic skiiis and leadership we shall have fruitful discussions and a successful outcome. You c!an count on full cooperation of my delegation in achieving this goal.
Serbia and Montenegro fully aligns itself with the statement nude earlier by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the European Union I would hike to take this opportunity to present the views and highlight some of the activities undertaken by my
Government at the national level in connection with the Treaty on the of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
Mr. Chairman,
Non-Proliferation
Today, we are more than ever aware of the threat posed by( the weapons of mass destruction and their proliferation. The risk that these types jof weapons and means of their delivery be acquired by terrorists and terrorist organizat ions necessitates
Permanent Mission of Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations 854 Fifth Avenue • New York, NY 10021 • T 212-ft79~a700 • F 212-87^-8705
Global action and broadest cooperation within the international conmunity. In that context, our attention should be focused on the strengthening a^d improving the existing international instruments which provide a good framework to efficiently deal with this-global threat.	|
For its part, Serbia and Montenegro strongly supports all .efforts aimed at eliminating WMD, particularly nuclear weapons. In that connection, ai a State Party to the MPT Serbia and Montenegro attaches great importance to the Treaty as one of the most important international instruments in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We strongly support the universality of, and full compliance with, the NPT. We aJso uphold the consensus decisions reached at the 1995 and : 000 NPT Review Conferences.
Serbia and Montenegro attaches great importance to the activities of the Internationa) Atomic Energy Agency and its safeguards regime to ensure nuclear non-proliferation, which should be further strengthened. At the start of 2002, the Safeguards Agreement with the Agency was renewed enabling further strengthening of our cooperation with the Agency. In December 2003, it signed the Framework Agreement on Technical Cooperation with the IAEA. Serbia and Montenegro has reaffirmed its commitment to follow the guidelines contained in the Code of Conduct adopted by the Council of Governors of the Agency in September 2003 and confirmed by its General Conference.
!
We support the efforts to provide the Agency with all necessaty funds so that it may fulfill its mandate. For its part my country duly honors its obligations towards the IAEA budget. In view of the importance to strengthen nuclear safety; we consider that the Agency's funding for the implementation of the programs for nuclear safety promotion measures should be increased.	J
Furthermore, Serbia and Montenegro supports the Agency's efforts to strengthen the international cooperation in the field of management and transport] of nuclear waste. In that respect, we supported the tripartite initiative by the Governments of the United States and the Russian Federation and the IAEA whereby 80 per cer't of the enriched fresh nuclear fuel from Serbia and Montenegro has been safely transported back to the
Russian Federation, as a country of origin, for enrichment-level reduction,
i
Since my and many other countries are facing certain problems in the field of management and disposal of nuclear waste, we consider that States should be assisted by adequate funds in order to find long-term solutions to this issue. |We would like to take this opportunity to thank the US Government for the financial support granted to us in this respect,	j
My country ts fully committed to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only. However, it should be coupled with a strict control regime to prevent its misuse.
In order to achieve complete disarmament and non-proliferation framework, much more needs to be done. We support the early entry ir'to force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) as well as the conclusion ofj a fissile materia! cut-off treaty (FMCT). The Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro adopted the Law on the CTBT and the ratification instrument should be deposited with the Secretary-Genera] soon, furthermore, in November 2002/ we acceded to The Hague jCode of Conduct against Ballistic Missiles Proliferation. We perceive it as a very important part of the entire-non-proliferation regime. In February 2004, the Declaration wasj adopted whereby my country committed itself on a voluntary basis to honor the provisions contained in the documents of the Miss/fe TechnoJogy Control Regime, namely those included in the Equipment Software and Technology Annex and Guidelines for' Sensitive Missile Relevant Transfers.	j
Mr. Chairman,	
i
In conclusion, I am joining the other -speakers in the geiWal debate who expressed their hopes for the successful outcome of the third session |of the Preparatory Committee. We hope that the decisions to be made wjII lay solio groundwork and provide positive input for the 2005 NPT Review Conference.