Mr. President,
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the very important and challenging post of the President of the 2005 NPT Review Conference. We are confident that your able leadership as well as professional and diplomatic skills will gear the Conference to its successful outcome. In that respect, you can count on full cooperation and support of my delegation. I would also like to extend our congratulations to other members of the Bureau.
Serbia and Montenegro fully aligned itself with the statement made on Monday by H.E. Mr. Nicolas Schmit, Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union. However, I would like to add a few additional remarks from our national perspective.
Mr. President,
In the general debate over the past few days a broad consensus has become evident over the necessity to maintain, preserve and strengthen the integrity of the NPT regime. Even though there are different ideas on how to achieve that goal the desired outcome is common. We have to build on this basis and continue to seek an agreement.
The successful outcome of the Conference will represent a proof of our support to the entire international network of agreements in the field of nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, the NPT in particular.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, with its effective preventive mechanism and a strong system of verification, represents the cornerstone of the entire non- proliferation regime. In the course of past few years, the NPT regime acquired a new increased relevance and became an efficient tool in preventing catastrophes such as nuclear terrorism that can have unforeseen consequences and jeopardize the existence of the present-day world community.
With a prospect of this horrifying global threat we cannot afford to be modest in our actions. We have to do our utmost to achieve the broadest possible cooperation at all levels in order to ensure full compliance by all States with the existing Treaty's obligations. Since the responsibilities as well as benefits are shared, we have to make sure that everyone fulfils its task in entirety. That should be our imperative and the best guarantee for the international peace and security as well as an efficient tool to address all security challenges in the area of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
We should not lose sight of ultimate benefits provided by the Treaty - a more secure and more developed world. On the one hand, the NPT envisages the world free from nuclear weapons as the final goal of international community. On the other, it provides an adequate mechanism for preventing proliferation of these deadly weapons. Finally, it guarantees the right of every State Party to development and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
'However, it is up to us to do our share. We have to achieve the universality of the Treaty and ensure its full implementation. Furthermore, in order to strengthen confidence and trust in the effectiveness of the Treaty regime regarding verification of compliance, we have to develop further its control system, by making the Additional Protocol the verification standard required.
Mr. President,
On the basis of the Successor Statement of 29 August 2001 and recognizing the Treaty as one of the most important instruments in the field of nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, Serbia and Montenegro renewed its full-fledged membership in the NPT, assuming its share of responsibility for the achievement of its objectives. Although my country has not participated in previous Review Conferences, it fully supports the decisions reached by consensus then.
In that connection, we have to work together in order to achieve progress in all three pillars of the NPT.
As a non-nuclear weapons State, Serbia and Montenegro is committed to the elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction, nuclear weapons in particular. Nuclear disarmament, as a gradual process, can be achieved by the fulfillment of disarmament obligations by nuclear weapon states. We are welcoming all the steps made in that direction.
My country attaches great importance to the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). We consider the CTBT as an important link in the chain of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It was with that goal in mind that Serbia and Montenegro ratified the CTBT in May 2004, joining the family of 175 States that pledged their support to the objectives stipulated under the Treaty.
We also support an early commencement within the Conference of Disarmament of the negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT). As an observer in CD, my country is ready to make its contribution to the successful outcome of these negotiations.
Mr. President,
In the context of the serious challenges that the NPT regime is facing in the field of non- proliferation, we have to invest additional efforts in order to enhance international cooperation in that area. Serbia and Montenegro attaches great importance to the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and its verification mechanisms. The procedure of ratification of the Additional Protocol has been initiated in my country, and it is expected to be completed in the near future. Serbia and Montenegro developed a very constructive and fruitful cooperation with Agency, particularly in the field of management of radioactive waste.
We welcome all initiatives at the international and regional levels in the fight against proliferation of the WMDs. My country supports the role of the Security Council in that field and full implementation of its Resolution 1540 (2004). Serbia and Montenegro has honored its obligation under the Resolution by submitting recently a report on the measures undertaken at the national level in order to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
I would also like to express our satisfaction with the adoption by the UN General Assembly of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Acts of the Nuclear Terrorism, as a very important part of the international legal network in this field.
At the national level, Serbia and Montenegro recognizes the need for a strong national export control regime. As of 31 March 2005, my country started to implement a new Law on foreign trade in arms, military equipment and dual-use goods, which includes the Lists of dual- use goods compiled by the EU Commission.
Furthermore, my country is fully committed to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under a strict verification regime. We must not permit the misuse of the benefits provided by the Treaty, which could lead to the weakening of the entire regime.
Mr. President,
The 2005 Review Conference is expected to reach an agreement on concrete and serious steps enabling the NPT regime to tackle in a timely manner a challenge, both traditional and a new one in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Although such an important task places great responsibility on our work today, we are confident that together we can find a compromise and efficient solution.
Mr. President,
In conclusion, I would like to join other speakers in expressing our expectation for the further progress and joint actions, aimed towards the protection and maintenance of international peace and security. This Conference can make its valuable contribution to this process.
Thank you.