PERMANENT MISSION OF SINGAPORE
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
231 EAST 51ST STREET, NEW YORK, NY 10022
TEL: (212) 826 0840 FAX: (212) 826 2964
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR KAREN TAN,
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF SINGAPORE
TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK,
AT THE THIRD SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR
THE 2015 NPT REVIEW CONFERENCE, NEW YORK,
28 APRIL – 9 MAY 2014
Mr Chairman,
1 The Singapore delegation congratulates you, on your election as the Chair
of the 3rd session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. This meeting presents an
important opportunity to address the most pressing challenges confronting the NPT
today. We are confident that under your able leadership, this meeting will be a
success.
Mr Chairman,
2 In recent years, the NPT has come under severe stress. Concerns about
non-compliance with the Treaty and fundamentally divergent perceptions about the
adequacy, fairness and purpose of the NPT have led to a crisis of legitimacy and
relevance. The chasm between Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) and Non-Nuclear
Weapon States (NNWS) has grown wider over the lack of progress in nuclear
disarmament on the one hand and the perceived over-emphasis on nuclear
proliferation on the other hand. Israel, India and Pakistan remain outside the ambit
of the NPT. The DPRK has withdrawn from the NPT and maintains a nuclear
programme that does not come under any international safeguards regime.
3 Singapore firmly supports the objectives of the NPT and its three pillars of
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy (PUNE). The three pillars are mutually reinforcing and equally important.
They represent a delicate balance of interests, which constitutes the core bargain of 
the Treaty. Failure to achieve progress in one pillar will affect the impetus on the
others.
First Pillar: Nuclear Disarmament
4 We recognise that complete nuclear disarmament remains a long term
aspiration. Nuclear-armed states must believe that it is in their long-term national
security interest not to rely on nuclear deterrence. Nevertheless, we have to start
somewhere and even small steps matter. Nuclear-weapon states can do much more
to reassure non-nuclear weapons states of their commitments under Article VI of
the Treaty. We regret that the political commitment to achieve real progress on
nuclear disarmament remains weak. The US and Russia, which possess close to
95% of the world’s nuclear weapons, have a special responsibility to lead by
example. To that end, we welcome President Obama’s call last year to further cut
the US and Russia’s nuclear arsenals by a third, from the level agreed in the New
START. We strongly encourage the US and Russia to commence discussions on
this issue. In the meantime, other steps could be taken by all Nuclear Weapons
States, including refraining from qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons.
Crucially, we must also find a way to involve non-NPT states with nuclear
weapons capabilities in disarmament discussions. Their continued exclusion
fundamentally undermines our collective efforts towards complete nuclear
disarmament.

5 The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) remains a key tool to
advance disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and build mutual trust and
confidence. Its entry into force is long overdue. Singapore welcomes GuineaBissau,
Iraq and Niue’s ratification of the CTBT since the PrepComm in Geneva
last year. We urge all countries, in particular, the remaining countries in Annex 2,
to sign and ratify the CTBT. Progress also needs to be made at the Conference of
Disarmament and on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) which have been
at an impasse for too many years.
6 Singapore supports the establishment of nuclear weapons free zones, which
are concrete steps taken by non-nuclear weapons states to fulfil their obligations
under Article VI of the Treaty. Singapore is party to the Southeast Asia Nuclear
Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (SEANWFZ), which entered into force in 1997. The
establishment of the Zone has played a critical role in the continued peace, stability
and security in our region. We remain committed to keep our Zone free of nuclear 
weapons. We hope that all five Nuclear Weapon States will do the same and
encourage them to sign the Protocol to the SEANWFZ without reservations as
soon as possible. We also urge all relevant parties to work together constructively
to expeditiously convene the Conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction as
mandated by the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
Second Pillar: Nuclear Non-Proliferation
7 The risk of proliferation of nuclear technology and material as well as
dual-use items for military purposes remains a major concern. In this regard,
nuclear non-proliferation could be strengthened on several fronts. First, through
enhancing nuclear security measures at the national, regional and international
level. It is important that we secure both civilian and non-civilian nuclear material
and facilities. Second, by acceding to and fully implementing key international
legal instruments such as the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (CPPNM) and its 2005 Amendment. Singapore will be acceding to the
CPPNM and its 2005 Amendment shortly. We also encourage the NPT State
Parties who have not done so to sign on to the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and its Additional Protocol. Singapore acceded to the Additional
Protocol in 2005.
8 Third, we should work towards a more robust international export control
regime to guard against illicit trafficking, while at the same time not hampering
legitimate trade. As a major transhipment hub, Singapore takes our counterproliferation
obligations seriously. However, it is insufficient for only some
jurisdictions or ports to tighten their export control regimes. The entire supply
chain must be secure, otherwise proliferators will simply exploit the weakest link.
Singapore is committed to safeguard our link of the global supply chain. We have
a robust export controls system and fully abide by all our international obligations,
including under UN Security Council Resolution 1540. In addition, we participate
in relevant multilateral and regional initiatives, including the Container Security
Initiative, the Proliferation Security Initiative, the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism and the Asian Senior-level Talks on Non-Proliferation.
9 With respect to countries of proliferation concern, Singapore urges the
DPRK to return to the NPT, fully comply with all relevant UNSC Resolutions, and
cooperate promptly with the IAEA in the full and effective implementation of its 
comprehensive safeguards obligations. On the Iranian nuclear dossier, we are
encouraged by the recent progress made between the P5+1 and Iran; as well as
between Iran and the IAEA to address the international community’s concerns over
the nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We believe that with strong political will
and sincerity from relevant players, it is possible to reach a durable and
comprehensive agreement.
Third Pillar: PUNE
10 The peaceful application of nuclear science and technology can help to
improve the socio-economic conditions in many countries. Singapore supports the
right of sovereign states to peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology
provided for under Article IV of the NPT. However, rights come with
responsibilities. The peaceful application of nuclear science and technology must
be carried out in a safe, secure and safeguarded manner. As more countries
consider the use of nuclear science and technology, including nuclear energy, for
the first time, the international community can assist in sharing knowledge and
expertise. The IAEA, in particular, should assist with training and other capacitybuilding
programs to help countries establish the necessary regulatory and legal
infrastructure to promote the highest standards of nuclear safety and security and
enhance their emergency preparedness and response capabilities.
To conclude, Mr Chairman,
11 The NPT is facing serious existential challenges and must evolve to keep
pace with current realities. In addition, we need to take into account developments
outside the NPT, in particular, in respect of non-NPT State Parties, which affect
the credibility and relevance of the whole regime. This review process is an
important opportunity for us to have a frank and constructive dialogue on how we
can ensure the Treaty’s continued relevance. We need to reaffirm our commitment
through concrete action and propose practical and pragmatic steps to advance the
core objectives of all three pillars of the NPT.
. . . . .