
SLOVENIA
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY !
Statement by the Republic of Slovenia
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 23 April to 4 May 2018
Mr Chairperson, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me start by congratulating Ambassador Bugajski for assuming the
role of the Chairperson of the second Preparatory Committee meeting of
the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and wish him every success in his endeavors.
In addition to the statement of the European Union, which we fully
support, as well as the statement on progressive approach, I would also
like to make some remarks in my national capacity and contribute to our
collective responsibility for successful implementation of the NPT.
Mr Chairperson,
Slovenia is a strong supporter of non-proliferation, arms control and
disarmament of nuclear weapons.
We are of firm belief that we have to achieve our common goal of the
world free of nuclear weapons progressively through the full
implementation of the NPT. For Slovenia the NPT remains the
cornerstone of disarmament, non-proliferation and development of
nuclear energy applications for peaceful purposes.
At the 2010 NPT Review Conference we have agreed on the step-bystep
Action plan with practical measures also in the area of 
disarmament, in accordance with its Article VI, to which we are all
committed.
We all agreed to do our utmost to bring the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) into force. Given the importance that Slovenia
attaches to this issue, it was among the topics discussed at the Bled
Strategic Forum, our high-level platform for discussing pressing regional
and global issues, in 2016 as well as in 2017. The Executive Secretary of
the CTBTO Dr Zerbo highlighted the importance of the entry into force of
the CTBT for global security. I would like to use this opportunity to call
on all states, particularly those listed in Annex II, to sign and ratify
the Treaty without delay and without preconditions.
We also encourage the Conference on Disarmament to begin
negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
use in nuclear weapons. Slovenia has supported the relevant UN
General Assembly resolutions related to this issue, including the
convening of open-ended consultative meetings and sessions of the
High-Level Expert Preparatory Group led by Canada. We are strongly
convinced that these meetings will help bridge the differences in our
understandings of the FMCT and hopefully (soon) lead to negotiations.
We believ that the recently established second subsidiary body to
the CD will contribute to that as well.
We believe that significant progress has been made in both mentioned
areas, as well as in the area of nuclear disarmament verification.
Transparency in the area of ballistic missiles (HCoC), decreasing the
operational readiness of nuclear weapons, negative security assurances,
as well as establishing and maintaining nuclear weapons free zones
(NWFZ) are also important steps that are being taken and we
encourage all nuclear weapon states to participate in these
initiatives. In our view, effective, verifiable and irreversible nuclear
disarmament requires not only appropriate technical and security
conditions, but also an active engagement of states that possess
nuclear weapons.
We encourage the United States and the Russian Federation to extend
the New START Treaty and preserve the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty.
Mr Chairperson,
As one of only thirty states with an operating nuclear power reactor,
Slovenia attaches great importance to the work of the IAEA. This is
clearly demonstrated through our current membership in its Board of
Governors.
We welcome the significant contribution of the Agency to the
implementation of the NPT.
We commend the role of the IAEA in ensuring Iran's on-going
implementation of its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. The JCPoA clearly shows that even the most difficult
issues can be resolved by diplomatic and peaceful means. Slovenia
therefore counts on continued compliance with the nuclear deal by
all sides. This is essential to ensure international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We welcome the high-level talks between the Republic of Korea and
the DPRK, as well as foreseen talks between the US and DPRK, and
we support diplomatic efforts aimed at de-escalating the situation and
achieving the complete, verifiable and irreversible de-nuclearisation of
the Korean Peninsula through peaceful means. However, Slovenia
strongly condemns the grave violation of numerous resolutions
adopted by the UN Security Council by DPRK. We call on all states to
fully and effectively implement the restrictive measures. We joined the
statement of the Proliferation Security Initiative on the need to step up
the implementation of the last two UN Security Council resolutions
related to the DPRK.
Syria should also resolve all the outstanding issues and adhere to the
Additional Protocol. Together with the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement it constitutes an effective verification standard.
Mr Chairperson,
Slovenia is concerned with the risk of non-state actors acquiring
WMD's. We have been therefore supporting UNSC resolution 1540 and
the work of the 1540 Committee to strengthen global capacity to prevent,
detect, and respond to the use of WMD for terrorist purposes.
We understand that nuclear security remains the responsibility of the
states. We thus strongly support international cooperation in this area to 
effectivelly cope with serious challenges both on the global and national
levels. Within Nuclear Security Contact Group we aim to facilitate
cooperation and strengthen activities on nuclear security. As a
country whose experts were deeply engaged in the process of
preparation of the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material (a-CPPNM), we underline the
importance of its universalization and full implementation.
Mr Chairperson,
In the IAEA Board of Governors we follow closely our priority areas
such as nuclear energy, nuclear safety and technical assistance.
Nuclear security and nuclear safety enable the peaceful use of
nuclear technology. Slovenia supports the Agency in its discharge of
statutory obligations by offering technical assistance in its area of work,
regardless the big differences in the needs of Member states. Slovenia is
always open to share its experience with others and is interested in
improving its own capabilities. This kind of capacity building is vital for
any country dealing with nuclear technology. We welcome and support
the Agency's contribution to the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goals.
Mr Chairperson,
We will contribute to constructive discussions in the next days that will
hopefully lead us to a successful 2020 NPT Review Conference.
Thank you.