Allow me to begin, Mr. President, with congratulating you on the assumption of this highly demanding post of the President of the NPT Review Conference. I would also like to assure you of the Slovak delegation's full support in fulfilling your responsible and challenging tasks.
Mr. President, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The General Statement delivered by the distinguished Representative of Luxemburg on behalf of the European Union has embodied the main elements that we consider to be of outmost importance. Slovakia fully supports and aligns itself with this statement. Nevertheless, I would like to make some additional comments on issues that are of a particular interest of my delegation.
Mr. President,
Among a myriad of various interests people may have, there are some common ones for all of us regardless of the level of our understanding for them. Global security definitely ranks very high among them. However, it continues to be threatened by proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. This is a serious challenge that must be addressed with full responsibility. The fight against this phenomenon cannot be won by a single country at a single battlefield. It requires a joint effort of the whole international community in the spirit of multilateralism.
f
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, His Excellency Mr. Eduard Kukan emphasized in his recent address to the Conference on Disarmament that there is a need for balanced treatment of the NPT in all its areas to ensure that its overall purpose is accomplished. Harmonization of measures to provide such a balance is extremely important, although very difficult in a world full of proliferation risks. Let me continue in this spirit.
The NPT represents one of the cornerstones of our security. However, this crucial treaty has been under increasing strain in recent years. Concentrated effort to improve the non- proliferation regime is sorely needed so as not to challenge further its overall credibility. Strengthening the NPT is the only viable way that can fortify global security. These days we have gathered here to face these challenges. This review will be under pressure stemming from large amount of threats either traditional or new ones and simultaneously from the different ways we perceive them. It is our role to make, vis-a-vis these threats, the right assessment in the right time.
The three pillars of the NPT represent a system of communicating vessels the delicate balance of which must be preserved. In this regard, Slovakia considers the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference highly relevant and of particular importance for my delegation. It is the intention of my delegation to work towards preservation of its relevance in the forthcoming future. Nevertheless, my intervention will focus on the issue of proliferation of nuclear weapons that is at the very top of the international danger list. The risk of spreading these weapons together with the possibility that they might fall into the hands of terrorists represents a grave danger to international security. The other side of the coin is the increasing need of more and more countries to use nuclear energy to solve their energy demands. Bearing these inherent contradictions in mind, the international community must be given assurances that nuclear technologies and material are not misused. As a result, strict compliance with non-proliferation obligations and accountability are inevitable.
Each multilateral system properly works only in the environment of universal confidence and responsible behaviour. The NPT is not exceptional in this respect. The confidence must be backed up by clear and strong tools that allow us to launch a swift response if needed. Ability to act together in a concerted manner is an important moment of deterring possible violations of generally accepted norms. We dispose of unique multilateral instruments that must be preserved and reinforced to be able to build on in future.
First of all, it is the Safeguards System of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that I have in mind. Slovakia is convinced that the Additional Protocol (to it) should become its integral part in every country. It is an essential tool for efficient and effective performance of the IAEA's verification activities. Thus, it should expeditiously be developed into a verification standard. The IAEA must be equipped with a tool able to verify the absence of activities not consistent with the NPT. The inalienable right for peaceful use of nuclear energy must be backed by mutual certainty that it is not misused for other purposes. Unfortunately, universality of such a system and its global implementation is still far from the reality. Without the afore-said tools in force we can hardly speak about responsible behaviour and building the so much needed trust.
Furthermore, the non-proliferation regime could certainly be reinforced. The early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) with its comprehensive verification regime represents one of the opportunities in this regard. States that have not yet signed and ratified the CTBT can thus give a crucial impetus to this process of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Early commencement of negotiations on a global treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear explosive devices (FMCT) would represent another crucial contribution to this process. Much can be done by members of the Conference on Disarmament in this respect.
Export controls certainly rank among effective tools for strengthening the non-proliferation regime. Recent revelation of the "nuclear material black market" confirms that there is an urgent need for further upgrading of control over supplies of WMD related items. The United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540 represents one of crucial instruments in this respect.
Mr. President,
To sum up, let me stress that we all must be clear both in our statements and in practical steps about one point of crucial importance: non-proliferation obligations are not temporary tools of bargain allowing to obtain nuclear technologies and materials. It is regrettable that activities of some NPT States Parties prove rather different intentions than those set forth in Article TV of the Treaty. Therefore we acutely need a comprehensive, defendable and irreversible system of security safeguards and effective verifications that dispels all our concerns. When the IAEA is not in a position to confirm in more than one hundred countries without the Additional Protocol in force that there are no undeclared nuclear activities going on within their territories, it is not a global system. When not all members of the United Nations show their clear intention to implement fully, unconditionally and without any delay the afore-said Resolution 1540 on non-proliferation of WMD, it is not a global system. The global system and its functionality cannot depend on someone's unpredictable decisions or actions. The global system means that all countries respect all obligations.
f
Mr. President,
The international community finds itself at an important crossroad. Every five years we have a possibility and a unique opportunity to strengthen the non-proliferation system and to arm it with new weaponry serving this purpose. The only acceptable way is to go in the direction of constant decreasing of all related risks, possibly to their complete eradication. We must not fail in the test we are standing in front of at this Conference.
I do not assume that we will solve all open questions now at this Conference. We must be realistic but at the same time cooperative and responsible. We should bear in mind that the future will look exactly as we shape it now. It heavily depends on various elements and instruments we have in our hands. Let us use this opportunity to put them together in a way that the mankind may praise both now and in days coming after.
Thank you for your attention.
