S L O V A K I A
STATEMENT
by
H. E. Mr. František Ružička
Permanent Representative of Slovakia
to the United Nations
at the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
30 April 2014
New York
-Check against delivery- 
1
Mr. Chairman,
I congratulate you on your assumption of the chairmanship of this Committee's session and
wish you all the success in your endeavors.
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Nevertheless, let me make few comments that are of particular interest to my delegation.
Mr. Chairman,
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) stands at the very center of a
landscape of non-proliferation and disarmament instruments available to the international
community. It remains a unique and irreplaceable framework for maintaining and
strengthening international peace, security and stability.
Its three mutually reinforcing pillars represent a system of communicating vessels whose
balance must be preserved. We must be assured about the absence of activities not consistent
with the NPT as much as we need guarantees that there is a real progress on nuclear
disarmament towards total elimination of nuclear weapons thus generating further incentives
for peaceful use of nuclear energy, importance of which continues to raise in many civilian
applications and may help us to address many challenges we face in the sphere of energy,
health, research and development.
Universal adherence to the norms and disarmament and non-proliferation commitments of the
Treaty, which also provides opportunities for peaceful use of nuclear energy, represents a
challenge to our global security. It remains one of long-term priorities for my country. We
call on all States not parties to the Treaty to accede to it as non-nuclear weapon states.
Mr. Chairman,
Slovakia together with other countries has submitted the working paper on "Building Blocks
for a World without Nuclear Weapons" (that is available in the document
NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/WP.23). This working paper should contribute to further discussion
on nuclear disarmament in concrete and practical terms. A focus on such an approach foresees
the possibility of parallel and simultaneous measures.
In this regard let me underline that my country, inter alia, continues to support immediate
commencement of the negotiation on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices, which would be a part of the
architecture of a nuclear weapon free world. We consider such a treaty as an indispensable
step towards achieving our final goal of a word free of nuclear weapons.
The 2010 Review Conference of the NPT expressed “deep concern at the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons”. This issue is an important
element of a complex discourse on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, which
includes humanitarian and security considerations. Slovakia believes that the total elimination 
2
of nuclear arsenals would need a substantive and constructive engagement of states
possessing nuclear weapons if banning them should deliver in terms of their elimination.
Mr. Chairman,
International community continues to face many challenges to international peace and
security, including to the non-proliferation regime. The nuclear and missile programmes of
the North Korea as well as the nuclear programme of Syria are matter of serious concern. In
case of Iran we welcome recent developments and hope that more progress will be achieved
to successfully address this issue. More recently new concerns have appeared: the violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine represents a challenge, which undermines
principles of the non-proliferation regime. We should work together and concentrate our
efforts with an aim to address and prevent them from happening and recurring again.
Slovakia supports the outcomes of the 2010 NPT Review Conference on Middle East. We
regret that the Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction planned for 2012 has been postponed.
Nevertheless, we are encouraged by recent informal meetings in Glion, and continue to fully
support facilitator Ambassador Jaakko Laajava of Finland in his efforts and the ongoing
preparations for a successful conference with the participation of all States in the region.
Mr. Chairman,
Slovakia fully supports peaceful use of nuclear energy. Peaceful use of atom could bring
benefits in many areas – from healthcare to the production of energy.
Nuclear power has been providing electricity worldwide since the 1950s. Most significantly,
nuclear power is a mature technology, which has very significantly improved safety and
operational efficiency with each new generation of designs. It is the most efficient and costeffective
low emissions fit-for-service base-load electricity generation option. In addition to
that for many years humanity has been benefiting from its other recognized advantages.
However, trust and confidence are the key elements for its development. They must go hand
in hand with the highest safety and security standards as well as non-proliferation conditions.
We believe that the full-scope safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and the Additional Protocol constitute the current verification standard, which would enable
to provide a confidence that nuclear energy is developed in the best non-proliferation
conditions. We must work towards universalization and reinforcement of these instruments.
Nuclear energy is essential for meeting overall energy needs in Slovakia. Nuclear power
plants cover for a substantial percentage of my country’s electricity production.
Slovakia has successfully commenced the European stress tests and incorporated the lessons
learned into the National Action Plan. We encourage other countries to perform risk and
safety assessments for nuclear power plants in operation and under construction in
cooperation with the Agency. 
3
We should reinforce our focus on nuclear safety and security and on maintaining nuclear
power for peaceful applications.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 