STATEMENT
BY
AMBASSADOR TEBOGO SEOKOLO
RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE REPUBLIC OF
SOUTH AFRICA
FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON.
PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENERAL DEBATE
MAY2017
VIENNA
Check against delivery
GENERAL DEBATE
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the New Agenda Coalition,
South Africa shares the deep concern expressed by the vast majority of
State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and effects of
a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident, miscalculation or
design with the devastating impact on all humanity and its environment
cannot be adequately addressed. We remain convinced that nuclear
weapons do not guarantee security, but rather detract from it. As long
as these weapons exist, and vertical and horizontal proliferation persists,
humanity will continue to face the threat of catastrophe and mass
annihilation. The continued retention of nuclear weapons also serves as
a catalyst for further proliferation. The recent developments around the
Korean Peninsula clearly illustrates that the threat of the use of nuclear
weapons is not only real, but also imminent. It is imperative that we use
this Preparatory Committee as an opportunity to rededicate ourselves to
all efforts aimed at eliminating the threat posed by nuclear weapons
altogether. In this regard all efforts must be exerted to eliminate the
spread of these horrific weapons of mass destruction.
Chairperson,
The NPT represents a historical bargain between the nuclear-weapon
States and the non-nuclear-weapon States, in terms of which the former
have undertaken to eliminate their nuclear weapons based on the
reciprocal undertaking by the latter not to pursue the nuclear weapons
option. Maintaining this bargain is central to the integrity of the Treaty if
it is to remain the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
The reaffirmation of the continued validity of the outcomes of 1995 and
2000 particularly the unequivocal commitment by the nuclear-weapon
States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and the
agreement to apply the principles of transparency, irreversibility and
verifiability in fulfilment of Treaty obligations, provided renewed hope
towards the achievement of the NPT’s overall objectives. The outcomes of
the 2010 NPT Review Conference, including the extensive Acton Plan
under all three Treaty pillars remain valid
However, the agreement on the 2010 Final Document fell short of meeting
the expectations on the progress made in the implementation of past
agreements nor did restore confidence among States Parties. In fact.
most States Parties remain seriously concerned about the lack of progress
in respect of nuclear disarmament. For this reason, South Africa believes
that the success of 2020 will be determined by the extent to which these
commitments by the NWS are being honoured.
Chairperson,
We regret that, beyond modest gains in reducing the number of
strategically deployed nuclear weapons in the context of the New
START agreement, not much concrete progress has been achieved in
the area of nuclear disarmament since 2010. Reductions are indeed
vital to removing the excessive destructive capabilities developed during
the Cold War but do not substitute for concrete, transparent, irreversible
and verifiable nuclear disarmament measures.
The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and ongoing
modernisation programmes, including in relation to delivery systems
provide a clear indication that some States continue to harbour
aspirations for the indefinite retention of these instruments of
destruction, contrary to their legal obligations and political commitments.
This undermines the NPT bargain and perhaps more importantly the
non-proliferation norms established by the Treaty.
South Africa believes that the continued reliance on nuclear weapons
has led to increased insecurity among NNWS. We continue to believe
that pending the total elimination of all nuclear weapons to which all
States Parties have committed to, the provision of effective,
unconditional, legally binding negative security assurances to the non
nuclear-weapon States under the NPT is a key element of the Treaty.
The provision of such assurances is not some ultimate objective in and
of itself, but is a pragmatic, interim and practical measure aimed at
strengthening the non-proliferation regime and contributing the objective
of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
While deeply concerned about the continuing stalemate in the
Conference on Disarmament, South Africa remains committed to the
soonest resumption of substantive work, including on the issues
addressed in the 2010 ActIon Plan pertaining to nuclear disarmament
We welcome the progress made by the UN Conference to negotiate a
legally-binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons leading towards
their total elimination and encourage all States to participate actively in
this endeavour, consistent with their legal obligations under Article VI of
the Treaty. We hope that this Conference will provide the necessary
impetus to give effect to the expectations of the international community
towards the achievement of a world without nuclear weapons. South
Africa believes that this new instrument would complement and
strengthen the NPT norms
Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the strengthened safeguards system remains
an essential element of our collective efforts to address the threat posed
by the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Such strengthened safeguards
would contribute to establishing confidence in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy which, in tum, would greatiy facilitate the transfer of
nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the benefit of
developing countries.
South Africa therefore maintains its principled position on the obligation of
States Parties to conclude Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements with
the IAEA as required under the Treaty. While the Additional Protocol is a
voluntary measure which does not emanate from the Treaty, South
Africa nonetheless regards it as an indispensable instrument to enable
the IAEA to provide credible assurances regarding the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities in a State.
My delegation is therefore encouraged by the progress that has been
made since 2010 in terms of the number of States that have now
concluded Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional
Protocols. We encourage further progress in the fulfilment of the 2010
Action Plan pertaining to non-proliferation.
Chairperson,
South Africa supports the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
in parts of the world where they do not yet exist, including in the Middle
East We share the conviction that the establishment of such zones
enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the
objectives of nuclear disarmament
South Africa views the 1995 resolution on the Middle East as part of the
package of decisions that enabled the indefinite extension of the Treaty
in 1995. The 2010 Review Conference agreed on specific actions
towards realisatlon of the establishment of the NWFZ in the Middle East.
However, we regret the lack of progress towards realisation of these
objectives. We therefore urge all States to redouble their efforts towards
convening gathering Conference on this important issue involving all
States of the region at the soonest possible date.
Chairperson,
The South African Government strongly condemns the nuclear tests
carried out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK). Since
the announcement by the DPRK in February 2005 that it had developed
a nuclear weapon deterrent capability, South Africa has consistently
called on the DPRK to veriflably dismantle any nuclear weapons, to
return to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) without delay, to
place all its facilities under comprehensive safeguards agreement with
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and to contribute
through strengthened confidence-building measures to global nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
South Africa welcomes the progress made towards the implementation
of the JCPOA with Iran and calls on all parties involved to fulfil their
obligations under the agreement
Chairperson,
Many countries are increasingly recognising nuclear energy as a viable,
reliable and dean option to meet their growing energy demands In this
context, South Africa South Africa is working towards an energy sector
that promotes economic growth and sustainable development, hence
nuclear energy has been identified (under the 2010 Integrated Resource
Plan) as part of our energy mix to address energy security in the
country.
Chairperson,
Article IV of the Treaty guarantees an inalienable right of all the State
Parties to develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy without
discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the Treaty. This
Article is of particular relevance and importance to Africa, given the need
for adequate energy supplies to fuel sustainable and accelerated
economic growth on our Continent.
South Africa’s approach to nuclear energy is premised on the fact that
peaceful nuclear co-operation and access to the benefits of nuclear
energy, pursuant to this Article are integral components of the Treaty.
We also derive benefits from applications of nuclear techniques to
health, nutrition and agriculture. In addition, South Africa’s international
legally binding obligations on nuclear disarmament and nuclear non
proliferation allow for the enrichment of uranium for peaceful purposes”
South Africa recognizes the growing role that the IAEA will have to play
in the future. Many of the IAEA’s TC projects are of strategic importance
to developing countries, particularly in Africa, in contributing towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Chairperson,
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the full
implementation of the NPT and its universality in pursuit of our common
goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear weapons. The
strength, credibility and vitality of the NPT rest on a fundamental bargain
across its three pillars, which must be recognized and upheld.
Thank you.