Mr. President,
I would like to join previous speakers in offering our congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In particular, I appreciate your sincere efforts to find common ground in the run-up to this meeting. I am confident that, under your able leadership, we will be smoothly guided through the challenging journey before us. I assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation as you carry out your valuable work.
I would also like to express my appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and support for the rekindling of the discussions in the field of nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, including through his Five-Point Proposal for Nuclear Disarmament.
Mr. President,
After a long period of stalemate, we gather here today amidst rising expectations for positive outcomes from the NPT Review Conference. There are many promising signs. Some nuclearweapon states are more forthcoming in fulfilling their obligations under Article VI and reducing the role of nuclear weapons in their nuclear doctrine. There has never been wider support for the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons. Despite the different priorities they possess, States Parties are working vigorously for the reinforcement of the NPT, which has been the cornerstone of the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
With all these promising factors, I believe that it is now our responsibility to ensure that this Conference is a success. The Republic of Korea firmly believes that the three pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing and complementary. Accordingly, maintaining a delicate balance between the three pillars is vital to the integrity and viability of the Treaty. In the last few decades, progress has been made in all three of the pillars of the NPT regime. Although a few states still remain outside the Treaty, the number of nuclear armed states did not reach "ten, fifteen, or twenty" as projected earlier. The total number of nuclear warheads has been reduced from 70,000 at the Cold War peak to the current number of around 20,000, showing a clear progress if not in a steady pace.
Furthermore, the international community has been appreciating the benefits from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Since the inception of the NPT, the total number of nuclear reactors around the world increased fivefold from 84 to 436, and we are expecting the coming Nuclear Renaissance as a solution to climate change and energy crisis.
And yet, even with all these positive aspects, we cannot deny that the NPT is faced with unprecedented challenges in each of the three pillars. The most serious among them is the challenge of nuclear proliferation. At the heart of the reason are the inherent loopholes in the NPT whereby determined proliferators can develop nuclear weapons capabilities under the guise of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The North Korean nuclear issue is a vivid example.
Mr. President,
The DPRK's nuclear development is one of the most serious challenges to the NPT, which severely damaged the raison d'etre of the NPT. The DPRK has continued to develop its nuclear capabilities, conducting nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009. Such provocative acts pose a serious threat to regional peace and security, and also to the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Against DPRK's nuclear tests, the international community responded in a unified and resolute manner through UN Security Council resolutions 1718 and 1874, which reaffirmed that the
DPRK cannot have the status of a nuclear-weapon state in any case. The resolutions also sent strong messages to the DPRK through sanctions measures, that it must implement its commitment to denuclearization. However, the inherent loopholes in the NPT exploited by the DPRK, including the possibility of abusing NPT Article X, have not been fully addressed. My delegation firmly believes that these are precisely the topics that this Conference must focus on. Aside from building pressure through sanctions, we have also continued efforts aimed at engaging the DPRK in dialogue, in cooperation with the countries concerned. The countries concerned remain committed to realizing denuclearization of the DPRK through the Six-Party Talks process. The Republic of Korea holds the view that dialogue should not be held for the sake of dialogue itself. The DPRK should demonstrate both a clear commitment as well as concrete actions toward denuclearization. Furthermore, we urge the DPRK to cease all aggressive and provocative rhetoric and behaviors that may pose a threat to peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and in Northeast Asia.
The Republic of Korea proposed a Grand Bargain initiative, which aims at encompassing in a single agreement all steps related to the DPRK's irreversible denuclearization and the Five Parties' corresponding measures. The countries concerned have reached a common understanding on this initiative, hi order to induce the DPRK to make the right choice, which is nuclear abandonment, the Republic of Korea will continue to cooperate with our partners in the Six-Party Talks and the international community.
The Republic of Korea urges the DPRK to fulfill its denuclearization obligations under UN Security Council resolutions and its commitments under the Joint Statement of September 19, 2005. In this regard, we would like to emphasize that Security Council resolutions should be fully implemented until the DPRK takes significant denuclearization measures. We call upon the DPRK to fully implement its denuclearization commitments and to return to the NPT.
Mr. President,
The Republic of Korea welcomes the tireless efforts undertaken by the relevant parties and supports a peaceful resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue. While it is our firm belief that the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as described in Article IV of the NPT should be fully respected, all suspicions and concerns regarding Iran's nuclear program should be addressed in accordance with its international obligations. In this regard, we call upon Iran to respond in a timely and positive manner to the calls from the international community and to restore international confidence regarding the peaceful nature of its nuclear activities.The Republic of Korea is convinced that strengthening the NPT regime is the most effective way to overcome the current pressing challenges. In this regard, we place our priorities on the following points and wish to make substantial progress on them during this Conference.
First, my delegation firmly believes that further progress in nuclear disarmament is imperative for the integrity and legitimacy of the NPT. We welcome the New START Treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States as a starting point to facilitate the goal of general and complete disarmament. We also reiterate the importance of an entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the early commencement of negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), without further delay.
Second, the Republic of Korea attaches great importance to strengthening the IAEA-centered nuclear safeguards and verification regime. In this regard, my delegation underlines the importance of enhancing the IAEA's verification authority and capabilities through the universalization of the Additional Protocol (AP). Bearing in mind the growing threats of nuclear terrorism, we welcome the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington last month as a timely initiative to translate our political will into concrete actions.
As the host of the next Nuclear Security Summit, the Republic of Korea will continue to play its part to enhance nuclear security through active participations in the work of the IAEA, the G-8 Global Partnership and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). We continue to support Security Council resolutions 1540 and 1887, and fully endorse the guiding rules therein on nuclear non-proliferation, security, safety and safeguards.
Third, the Republic of Korea places utmost value on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as we depend heavily on nuclear energy as a source of electricity. To continue on the sustainable development, the secure supply of nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management are vital to us. Nevertheless, we note that the exercise of the right by States Parties to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy may increase proliferation risk resulting from access to sensitive nuclear fuel technology.
For this reason, we are paying close attention to multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle as effective ways to promote the right under Article IV and address proliferation concerns. Furthermore, we believe that due consideration should also be given to the back end of the fuel cycle. Taking stock of our experiences of the participation in the International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO), the Generation IV, and the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership (GNEP), we look forward to further discussions with States Parties in this regard.
Mr. President,
I believe that the 2010 NPT Review Conference represents an opportunity to breathe new life into the NPT. It offers us a chance to respond effectively to the mounting challenges to the global non- proliferation regime and reaffirm our steadfast commitment under the Treaty. Now we have a golden opportunity to do that and we should not let this pass us by.
All of us in this room share a primary responsibility to rise to tills noble task. It is my sincere hope, with a successful outcome from the 2010 Review Conference, that we can prove that a decade-long lull in this field was merely a respite before a rich harvest.
The Republic of Korea remains fully committed to these noble endeavors.
Thank you, Mr. President. /End/











 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 4


 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3


Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



