- 1 -
Statement by H.E. Ambassador KIM In-chul
Deputy Permanent Representative
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea
to the UN Secretariat and International Organizations in Geneva
General Debate
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
23 April, 2018
Mr. Chairman,
I feel privileged to speak on behalf of the ROK government at this
very critical moment for the future of the global nonproliferation
regime of which the NPT remains as cornerstone.
As we begin the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference, I would like to reaffirm the Republic of
Korea’s commitment to the Treaty and to maintaining and
strengthening the nonproliferation regime we have built together. We
firmly believe that the NPT continues to be the cornerstone of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and that the three
pillars of the Treaty – disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful 
- 2 -
uses – are mutually reinforcing and thus should be pursued in a
balanced manner.
This review cycle is particularly important for many reasons. As we
celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty, the Review Conference
will be a stock-taking of what we have achieved and what we have
not. Most importantly, we need to prove that this Treaty is relevant
today and the work of the NPT community is genuinely contributing
to a better and safer world for future generations.
In spite of the remarkable achievements we have made over the
past years, there are still serious challenges to the Treaty and the
global nonproliferation regime. The North Korean nuclear issue is of
particular concern to us. Even within the short period following the
last PrepCom, North Korea conducted its 6th nuclear test on 3
September and launched multiple ballistic missiles in violation of UN
Security Council resolutions. There is no doubt that North Korea’s
nuclear and missile development seriously undermines the entire
nonproliferation regime based on the NPT, the de-facto moratorium
on nuclear testing and, more fundamentally, the UN Charter.
Such actions were met with nothing but ever stronger measures,
including further strengthened sanctions imposed by UN Security
Council resolutions 2356, 2371 and 2375. As the entire NPT
community has repeatedly declared, North Korea cannot have the
status of a nuclear weapon state under the Treaty. The only path for
the regime is to abandon its nuclear weapons programme in a 
- 3 -
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner, and return at an early
date to compliance with NPT obligations and IAEA Safeguards.
As the core stakeholder of this issue, the Republic of Korea has
worked closely with the international community to strengthen the
implementation of the UN Security Council sanctions measures. At
the same time, we also tried not to lose sight of efforts to resume
dialogue in pursuit of a peaceful resolution of the issue. The ROK
government made consistent efforts to foster an atmosphere of
dialogue which led to North Korea’s participation in the Pyeongchang
Winter Olympics and the visit of North Korea’s high-level delegation
to Seoul. Building on such positive momentum, our special envoy’s
visit to Pyongyang and Washington resulted in agreements to hold
summit meetings between the two Koreas as well as between the
United States and North Korea.
As the two Koreas prepare for the historic inter-Korean Summit,
North Korea made an announcement that it would discontinue nuclear
tests as well as ballistic missile tests of intermediate and
intercontinental range and to dismantle its nuclear test site. We
welcome this announcement as a positive step forward.
This Friday, the inter-Korean Summit will be held at the South
Korean side of Panmunjeom. Along with the scheduled US-North
Korea Summit, it will serve as an opportunity to lay stepping stones
towards denuclearization and permanent peace on the Korean 
- 4 -
Peninsula. My government will continue to uphold the unwavering
principle of the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula as we seek
ways to peacefully resolve the North Korean nuclear issue and
establish permanent peace on the Korean Peninsula. At the same time,
as we move forward, sanctions, in particular those pursuant to UN
Security Council resolutions, will continue to be fully implemented
until North Korea takes substantial actions for denuclearization.
Taking this opportunity, I would like to ask your attention to and
support for our efforts.
Mr. Chairman,
The worsening security environment is another source of concern.
We are witnessing growing tensions among nuclear weapon states and
increasing disagreements on compliance and solutions. As a result, the
conditions for nuclear disarmament in general are worsening.
Disarmament cannot move forward in isolation. It is deeply
interlinked with the security situation of today.
If we want genuine progress in disarmament, efforts to create the
environment conducive to nuclear disarmament should be made.
Those efforts may include easing tensions, crisis management, risk
reduction, and communication to avoid miscalculation. An 
- 5 -
atmosphere of frank dialogue and cooperation is essential as well.
Hasty attempts to enforce disarmament cannot make real progress nor
contribute to the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
We should work together to improve the security environment in
general, while taking practical and effective steps to facilitate
disarmament efforts. In this regard, the ROK supports the ongoing
efforts of the High-Level Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT)
Expert Preparatory Group and look forward to the final report to be
concluded this year. We are also committed to the goal of the early
entry-into-force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and,
in this sense, commend the works made by the CTBTO and the
signatories to build and strengthen the International Monitoring
System (IMS). Nuclear disarmament verification (NDV) is also our
priority. As we believe that cooperation and preparation for verifiable
disarmament can bridge the gap between nuclear weapons states and
non-nuclear weapons states, the ROK government will host the
working group meeting of the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament Verification (IPNDV) in July.
Mr. Chairman
Most of us share the understanding that peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, among others, is an area where we can form wider consensus, 
- 6 -
and thus, make positive progress in this review cycle.
Exercise of the inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy
should entail compliance with nonproliferation and safeguards
obligations. As IAEA safeguards provide crucial assurance of a State's
compliance with its NPT obligation, the Republic of Korea attaches
great importance to the strengthening of the IAEA Safeguards system,
including by universalizing the Additional Protocol (AP). In order to
make sure safeguards are fully in place, the IAEA should be provided
with the necessary resources to carry out its mandate.
Applications of nuclear technology in the fields of health,
environment, and agriculture, among others, if well explored, could
reinforce the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). We endorse the IAEA Technical Cooperation (TC) program
as the core mechanism in providing developing countries greater
access to peaceful uses and applications of nuclear energy. In this
regard, the Republic of Korea has been providing financial and other
forms of contributions to the TC program. In particular, as the host of
the Regional Office of the Regional Cooperation Agreement (RCA),
we continue to take an active part in providing capacity-building
resources, training, and technical support to developing countries in
Asia and the Pacific.
We also believe that ensuring safe nuclear development and
security of nuclear materials is essential for the sustainable use of
atomic energy. As one of the early contributors to building the nuclear 
- 7 -
security architecture, the Republic of Korea has actively participated
in the preparatory processes of the 2019 IAEA Ministerial Conference
and the 2021 Amended CPPNM Review Conference. We also
strongly recommend that states that have not done so join the
ICSANT and the CPPNM and its amendment as early as possible.
Mr. Chairman,
Full compliance of the NPT in a balanced manner is the essence of
the global nonproliferation regime. In spite of diverging views and
priorities, all States Parties share the responsibility to maintain and
strengthen this regime. If we cannot prove our work is worthwhile,
the world will doubt the validity of the regime. We cannot afford to
fail at this review cycle. I assure you that my delegation will do our
part. Thank you. /END/