THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
335 East 45th Street, New York, N,Y. 10017
Tel (212) 439-4000, Fax (212) 986-1 083
Statement by H.E. Mr. SHIN Dong-ik
Deputy Minister for Multilateral and Global Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea
General Debate of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
27 April 2015
New York
<Check Against Delivery>
On behalf of the Government and people of the Republi c of Korea, I would like to convey deepest
condolences to victims and their famili es of devastating earthquake in Nepal last weekend.
Madame President,
Let me join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the Presidency of the 2015
NPT Review Conference. We highly appreciate your ceaseless efforts to bring all States Parties together fo r
the success of this Confe rence, and count on your able leadership. I assure yo u of my delegation's full
support and cooperation. Let me also express my delegati on's sincere gratitude to the UN Secretary-General
and the IAEA Director-Genera l for their leadership and their contribution in promoting the three pi llars of
the NPT.
Madame President,
In 20 I 0, this Conference was opened with great expectations amid the vision of a world free of nuclear
weapons. The New START Treaty was signed. The Nuclear Security Summit was launched to address new
types of nuclear threats. At the end of the four-week session of the Review Confe rence, we successfull y
produced the 64-point Acti on Plans.
Today, however, our scorecard shows mixed results. There have been certai n achievements. The most
notab le one is the recent agreement between P5+1 and Iran on the key parameters of the Joint
1 
Comprehensive Program of Action (JCPOA). My delegation highly appreciates the efforts made by P5+ I
and Iran, and looks forward to the creation of a model case of successful diplomacy to achieve nonproliferation
with its final agreement this June.
On the other hand, we have witnessed many events that run counter to the global non-proliferation efforts
during this review cycle. The DPRK conducted its third nuclear test in 2013, and repeatedly launched
ballistic missiles. The Conference on the establishment of a Middle East WMD-Free Zone has not convened
yet. Amidst growing expectations from the international community on nuclear disarmament, there is still a
considerable gap between the views held by nuclear weapons states and non-nuclear weapon states on the
progress we have made in this pillar. The NPT is under strain, yet again, and we need to address it squarely.
Madame President,
A treaty is no longer a treaty without the commitment and compliance of the parties. This point cannot be
over-emphasized for the NPT because this is not just another treaty. It is the one treaty which constitutes the
very foundation of international peace and security, and that binds us all for a common cause of nonproliferation
of nuclear weapons.
Our task today should be clear: recommit to and reinforce the NPT so that its credibility, integrity and
legitimacy are maintained. And we need to agree on how to transform our joint commitments into a concrete
action.
The Republic of Korea firmly believes that the three pillars of the NPT should be reinforced in a balanced
manner. In this regard, we place our priorities on the following points, on which we wish to make substantial
progress during this Conference.
First, my delegation believes that we need to look into the cases of nuclear proliferation and send a clear
message that such acts cannot be tolerated. If the NPT cannot address the challenges of proliferation
effectively, its credibility will be questioned. In this context, there must be a serious discussion on the issue
of withdrawal from the NPT during or after treaty violation. We also attach great importance to the
strengthening of the lAEA safeguards system by universalizing its Additional Protocol (AP), and we join
others in calling for the Conference on a Middle East WMD-Free Zone to be convened without delay.
In this regard, I would also like to highlight the importance of nuclear security, as enhanced nuclear security
will have positive effects on all three pillars of the NPT. As President Park Geun-hye of the Republic of
Korea mentioned at The Hague Nuclear Security Summit, "we need a holistic approach to promote synergy
among nuclear security, nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation."
Second, we firmly support further progress in nuclear disarmament. Admitting that there is still a wide gap
between what we can achieve and where we are, my delegation believes that further steps could be taken by
nuclear weapon states. Early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) remains a longoverdue
homework for all of us.
As a part of our contribution to the CTBT Article 14 process, the ROK will host the CTBT Group of
Eminent Persons meeting in Seoul on 25-26 June this year. We also welcome the report adopted by the UN
Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), and call for an
immediate start of FMCT negotiation.
2 
Third, the Republic of Korea places utmost value on further advancement of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. As the world's fifth-largest nuclear energy producer, we attach great importance to issues such as
assured fuel supply and efficient spent fuel management. Through peaceful nuclear cooperation with diverse
partners, the ROK is determined to take a leading role in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while
observing its non-proliferation obligations.
As a former recipient and current donor to IAEA's Technical Cooperation (TC) program, we firmly believe
that benefits of nuclear energy can be shared with the international community. The ROK also strongly
supports the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI), and has contributed more than five million USD during
this review cycle.
Madame President,
Here I would like to point out the case of North Korea, which keeps violating international non-proliferation
obligations every single day by engaging in nuclear activities, and casts the most fundamental challenge to
the Treaty.
It was only two years ago that the world witnessed the third nuclear test conducted by North Korea. As the
self-claimed "youngest nuclear weapon state," North Korea's national agenda is the "simultaneous pursuit of
nuclear weapons and economic development." They even announced their capability to conduct a
preemptive nuclear strike at the forum for multilateral disarmament negotiation. Such policy violates the
relevant UN Security Council resolutions and the NPT, and should not be tolerated.
I would like to emphasize two points. First, regarding North Korea's claim to be a nuclear weapon state, the
international community will never grant any status whatsoever to the country known for the most blatant
case of nuclear proliferation.
Second, history shows that such a mindless, continuous pursuit of weapons has failed. It is especially so,
when combined with suppression of its own people, seriously infringing upon humanitarian and human
rights norms. I would like to stress that North Korea's future lies not in the weapons of the past, and that
now is the time to heed the call of the international community and reverse its course.
The Republic of Korea urges the DPRK to return at an early date to the NPT and the IAEA safeguards, and
fully comply with the relevant international obligations.
Madame President,
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon pointed out, we are here to "not simply avoid a nuclear nightmare, but
to build a safer world for all." The vision of a world free of nuclear weapons is not unreachable, and it will
all start from this Treaty of ours. Let us stand united towards our common duty to guard this one Treaty that
has been, and will be, the lodestar for humankind in navigating through the Nuclear Age in a peaceful
manner.
Thank you, Madame President.
IEndl
3 