Statement by the Republic of South Africa durinq the General Debate of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
23 April 2018
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Group and the
New Agenda Coalition.
South Africa remains steadfast in its conviction that nuclear
weapons do not guarantee security, but detract from it. As long as
these weapons exist, and vertical and horizontal proliferation
persists, the world will continue to face the threat or annihilation.
The continued retention of nuclear weapons serves as a catalyst
for further proliferation. Recent developments around the Korean
Peninsula clearly illustrate that the threat of the use of nuclear
weapons is not only real, but also imminent.
We have said many times that the NPT represents a historic
bargain between the Nuclear-Weapon States and the NonNuclear-Weapon
States, in terms of which the former has
undertaken to eliminate their nuclear weapons based on the
reciprocal undertaking by the latter not to pursue the nuclear
weapons option. Maintaining this bargain is therefore central to
the integrity of the Treaty in order for it to remain the cornerstone
of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime
and the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
I
Chairperson,
The 2010 NPT Review Conference reaffirmed the continued
validity of the outcomes of 1995 and 2000, particularly the
unequivocal commitment by the Nuclear-Weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and the
aagreement to abide by the principles of transparency, irreversibility
and verifiability in Fulfilment or Treaty obligations. South Africa
believes that these commitments, including the extensive 2010
Acton Plan under eill three Treaty pillars, remain valid until fully
implemented.
However, the agreement on the 2010 Final Document still left most
States Parties seriously concerned about the lack of progress in
respect of nuclear disarmament. For this reason, South Africa
believes that the success of 2020 will be determined by the extent
to which these commitments by the NWS are being honoured.
Chairperson,
We regret that little concrete progress has been achieved in the
area of nuclear disarmament since 2010. Whilst reductions are
important, they do not substitute for concrete, transparent,
irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament measures. Ongoing
modernisation programmes, including in relation to delivery
systems, make it clear that some States still wish to indefinitely
retain these instruments of destruction, contrary to their legal
obligations and political commitments. This undermines the NPT
bargain and also the non-proliferation norms established by the
Treaty.
South Africa therefore welcomes the adoption of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and believes that it represents
one of the most important developments in the area of nuclear
2
weapons since 1945. It Fills a key remaining legal gap in
international law regarding weapons of mass destruction by
establishing a clear prohibition of nuclear weapons and would
complement and strengthen the NPT norms, in particular Article
Vl.
Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the strengthened safeguards system
remains an essential element of our collective efforts to address
the threat posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Such
strengthened safeguards - would contribute to establishi-ng
confidence in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy which, in turn,
would greatly facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and use
of nuclear energy to the benefit or deveoping countries.
We therefore maintain our principled position that States Parties
must conclude Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements with the
IAEA as required under the Treaty, whilst viewing the Additional
Protocol as an indispensable instrument to enable the IAEA to
provide credible assurances regarding the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities in a State.
Chairperson,
South Africa welcomes the progress made towards the
implementation of the JCPOA with Iran. In this regard, we call on
all the parties involved to continue fulfilling their obligations under
the agreement.
South Africa also supports the establishment of nuclear-weaponTree
zones in parts of the world where they do not yet exist,
including in the Middle East. We believe that such zones
enhance global and regional peace and security, strengthen the
3
nuclear non-proliferation regime and contribute towards realizing
the objectives of nuclear disarmament.
The '1995 resolution on the Middle East is an essential and
integral part of the package of decisions that enabled the
indefinite extension of the Treaty in 1995. Although the 2010
Review Conference agreed on specific actions towards the
realisation of the establishment or a Zone in the Middle East free
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
nothing has come of it. We therefore urge all States to redouble
their efforts towards convening a Conference on this important
issue involving all States of the region without any further delay.
Chairperson,
Of particular concern to South Africa are the tensions between
key members of the Security Council. It is as if we back in the
Cold War era, but the danger now, as stated by Secretary
General Guterres, is that we are without the mechanisms of
dialogue and communication that had previously that existed
during the cold war do not seem to apply this time, particularly
with regard to nuclear weapons.
Chairperson,
Like others, South Africa condemned the nuclear tests that have
been carried out by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(DPRK). The current tensions on the Korean Peninsula clearly
illustrate that neither the pursuit, nor the possession of nuclear
weapons can bring about increased security. The reality of the
threats facing the global community today is that they frequently
transcend national borders in our increasingly interconnected
world. This requires enhanced international co-operation and
strong international institutions that can respond to collective
security concerns. We welcome the planned Summit between the
DPRK, South Korea and the USA, which is expected to take place
4
in May 2018, as a positive step to a return to negotiations and
continue to believe that it is only through negotiations that a
sustainable solution can be found that would bring peace and
security to the region. We also welcome the reported statements
by the DPRK that it will not conduct any further tests.
Chairperson,
Article IV of the Treaty guarantees the inalienable right of all the
State Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear
energy purposes without discrimination and in conformity with
Articles I and II of the Treaty. This Article is of particular relevance
and importance to Africa, given the need for adequate energy
supplies to fuel sustainable and accelerated economic growth on
our Continent. South Africa's approach to nuclear energy is
premised on the fact that peaceful nuclear co-operation and
access to the benefits of nuclear energy, pursuant to this Article,
are integral components of the Treaty.
Many countries are increasingly recognising nuclear energy-as a
viable, reliable and clean option to meet their growing energy
demands, particularly in the context of the challenges of climate
change.
Chairperson,
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the full
implementation of the NPT and its universality in pursuit of our
common goal of achieving a world entirely free from nuclear
weapons. The strength, credibility and vitality of the NPT rests on
the fundamental bargain across its three pillars of nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy, which must be recognized and upheld.
I thank you.
5