Chairperson,
Allow me to congratulate you on your election as Chair of this Third Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) meeting for the 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference (RevCon) and to assure you of my delegation's fullest support and co-operation.
South Africa associates itself with the statements and proposals of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Africa Group and the New Agenda Coalition.
Chairperson,
South Africa would like to recall that when States Parties joined the NPT they voluntarily agreed to respect and implement the Treaty's three pillars. It remains the duty of us all to build on those three interlinked provisions of the Treaty in a balanced manner.
The NWS have the primary obligation to realise nuclear disarmament. Recent statements relating to the reductions of nuclear weapons and the vision of the "zero option" provide some hope as we continue in our efforts to pursue a safer world. Progress with regard to the CTBT and the resumption of negotiations on a Fissile Material Treaty will add the necessary confidence to implement the NPT obligations.
In recognising the legitimate right of all States to utilise the atom for peaceful purposes, we firmly believe that this right has to be exercised in a manner that the international community has adequate assurance that there will be no diversion for military purposes.
Chairperson,
It is incumbent upon all of us to fully commit ourselves to provide the IAEA with the necessary support to fulfil its safeguards and verification mandate particularly since the Agency is the only internationally recognised competent authority responsible for verifying and assuring compliance with the safeguards agreements of States Parties.
Nuclear safety and security remains important, and it is critical that the existing conventions and valuable guidelines of the IAEA are fully implemented.
South Africa believes that the provision of increased resources for the IAEA technical cooperation fund can assist with the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and also the targets of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
The existence of the illicit nuclear network presents a serious challenge to the Treaty which demands decisive action to counter it, including through the prosecution of those involved.
Chairperson
The establishment of the Nuctear-Weapon-Free Zones (NWFZs) is an indespensible and integral part of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime and we should therefore work towards creating NWFZs in those regions where they do not exist. We welcome the possibility of the early entry into force of the Treaty of Pelindaba.
In conclusion, Chairperson,
South Africa wishes to re-iterate that the NPT remains the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and we will continue to promote universal implementation and adherence to it. We all bear the responsibility to ensure that the process leading to the 2010 Review Conference, including this Meeting, is a success. The collective consensus decisions of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the 2000 Review Conference provide a sound basis for progress. We must now build on those decisions and have a collective responsibility to ensure a safer, nuclear-weapon free world and thereby ensure that hope is transformed into reality.
I thank you.