(Please check against delivey)
S taternen t
by
H.E. Dr. Kim Bong-hyun
Deputy Minister for Multilateral and Global Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
at
The First Preparatory Committee for
the 20 15 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
General Debate
May 2,2012
Vienna 
Mr. Cl~airman,
I would like to begin by expressing my heartfelt congratulations on
your assumption of the chairmanship of the first session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 201 5 NPT Review Conference. My delegation is
confident that under your able chairmanship, this session will indeed
produce fmitful results. And I would like to assure you of my delegation's
-Full cooperation during the deliberations at this PrepCom.
Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Korea believes that the NPT should continue to be
the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
regime. The three pillars the NPT stands on - nuclear disarmament, nuclear
nonproliferation and the peacehl uses of nuclear energy - should be
promoted in a mutually reinforcing manner. Preserving the balance among
them is vital to the credibility of the NPT regime.
Looking back on the global trend of nuclear disarmament and
nonproliferation in the recent past, my deIegation is of the view that the
NPT is still faced with daunting challenges. These include the proliferation
risks such as the DPRK and Iranian nuclear issues, insufficient progress in
nuclear disarmament, and the threat from a possible combination of nuclear
weapons and terrorism.
In particular, an early resolution of the DPRK nuclear issue is vital to
ensuring the integrity of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime as well
as securing peace on the Korean Peninsula and beyond. Strenuous efforts
have been made to achieve the verifiable denuclearization of the DPRK
through the Six-Party Talks. However, to our dismay, the DPRK carried out
a missile launch last month in direct violation of UN Security Council
Resolutions 17 18 (2006) and 1874 (2009).
The United Nations Security Council responded swiftly by adopting
a Presidential Statement just three days after the launch. In the Statement,
the Security Council strongly condemned the launch by the DPRK and 
demands that the DPFX immediately comply hlly with its obligations
under Security Council resolutions 1718 and 1874, including that it
abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner; immediately cease all related activities;
and not conduct any hrther launches that use ballistic missile technology,
nuclear tests or any further provocation. The DPRK should realize that
further provocations will only exacerbate its isolation.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation continues to hold a film belief that strengthening the
NPT-based regime is the most effective response to the current pressing
challenges. In this regard, I would like to highlight the following points to
reinforce the NPT regime.
First, it is important to keep up the momentum generated from the
2010 Review Conference. The success of the 2010 RevCon provides a
good point of departure for the 20 1 5 review cycle.
Second, Additional Protocol together with the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement represents a new verification standard and the
universal adherence to them is essential in ensuring confidence in the
compliance of States Parties with their Treaty obligations. Based on this
legal framework, the IAEA will be able to provide credible assurances not
only on the non-diversion of declared materials but also on the absence of
undeclared materials and activities, which will in turn promote
transparency and confidence among states.
Third, nuclear disarmament is crucial for minimizing the threat of
nuclear war and the unimaginable consequences that would come with it.
In this respect, my delegation takes note of President Obama's remarks at
Hankuk University on the occasion of his visit to Seoul in March. During
his speech, he announced a plan to conduct a comprehensive study aimed at
further reduction of US nuclear arsenal even beyond the target level of the
New START. And he also said that the US will continue to seek discussions
with Russia on a step it has never taken before - reducing not only its 
strategic nuclear warheads, but aIso tactical weapons and warheads in
reserve.
It is not an option, but rather a duty for all NPT parties, in particular
the nuclear weapon states, to fulfill their obligation under Article VI of the
Treaty and to undertake negotiations on effective measures leading to
nuclear disarmament. The first order of business should be an early entry
into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) and the
commencement of negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty
(FMCT).
Fourth, the RepubIic of Korea fully recognizes the inalienable
right of all NPT parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. However, the exercise of these rights entails
compliance with the obligations under the Treaty as reafflrrned in the final
document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In light of the sensitive
nature of nuclear energy and its potentially devastating non-peaceful
military apptications, it is our firm belief that the full confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peacefhl nature of a State's
nuclear program is prerequisite to realizing the benefits of peaceful use and
applications.
Fifth, we also emphasize the importance of robust international
cooperation to prevent nuclear terrorism. In this regard, the 2012 Seoul
Nuclear Security Summit carried us a step forward to the goal of 'A World
without Nuclear Weapons' by intensifying international efforts to combat
nuclear and radiological terrorism which threatens global security. In
particular, the Summit achieved meaninghl progress in securing and
minimizing nuclear materials, which can be used to manufacture nuclear
weapons. As the host of the 2012 Seoul Summit, the Republic of Korea will
continue to play a constructive role to enhance nuclear security through
active participations in the work of the IAEA, the Global partnership and
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). In addition,
we continue to support Security Council Resolutions 1540 and 1887, and
fully endorse the guiding rules therein on nuclear non-proliferation, security,
safety and safeguards. 
Last but not least, the Republic of Korea takes note of the Istanbul
meeting between E3+3 and Iran Iast month. The Republic of Korea
welcomes the tireless efforts undertaken by the relevant parties. While it is
our firm belief that the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as
described in Article IV of the NPT shouId be fully respected, all suspicions
and concerns regarding Iran's nuclear program should be addressed in
accordance with its international obligations. In this regard, we call upon
Iran to respond in a timely and positive manner to the calls of the
international community and to restore international confidence regarding
the peacefbl nature of its nuclear activities.
Mr. Chainnan,
In closing, my delegation reafiims our strong commitment to the
NPT regime. And we assure you, Mr. Chairman, that the Republic of Korea
will do its best for a successful 20 15 Review Conference that is essential to
Furthering international peace and security.
Thank you. /END/ 