STATEMENT BY
PERMANENT MISSION OF SOUTH AFRICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
333 EAST 38TH STREET 9TH FLOOR
NEW YORK, NY 10016
Tel: (212) 213-5583 Fax: (212) 692-2498
E-mail: pmun@southafrica-newyork.net
H.E. AMBASSADOR NOZIPHO MXAKATO-DISEKO
AT THE THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE SESSION
FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
28 April 2014
Check against delivery 
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the New Agenda Coalition.
Chairperson,
It seems fitting to start the South African statement with a quote from our beloved Former
President, the late Nelson Mandela when he addressed the United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) in 1998 and stated that "in reality, no rational answer can be advanced to explain in a
satisfactory manner what, in the end, is the consequence of Cold War inertia and an attachment to
the use of the threat of brute force to assert the primacy of some States over others." He realized
what all of us in this room intrinsically know: that nuclear weapons, which have the capacity to cause
untold human suffering and damage for generations to come, have no place in the post-Cold War
era and are useless in addressing the threats facing humanity today.
Chairperson,
The focus on the humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons is neither new in the
NPT context nor is it a distraction. In fact, the first preambular paragraph of the NPT notes "the
devastation that would be visited upon all mankind by a nuclear war and the consequent need to
make every effort to avert the danger of such war and to take measures to safeguard the security of
peoples". While the rest of the Treaty sets out how to achieve this objective, this first paragraph
clearly addresses what we set out to achieve.
It is clear that the impact of a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident or design, will not be
limited in space and time. Beyond the immediate humanitarian disaster, there will also be wider
impacts and longer-term consequences with regard to social and economic infrastructure, food
security, public health and the environment. While the consequences will be widespread, it is clear
that the poor and vulnerable will be the most severely affected.
For South Africa, humanitarian imperatives underpin our search for a world without the threat
posed by the possession, use and proliferation of nuclear weapons. Considering the devastating
effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, it is clear that due to their indiscriminate nature and
uncontrollable effects, any use of nuclear weapons, under any circumstances, would constitute a
violation of international law, particularly International Humanitarian Law (IHL).
Chairperson,
These considerations are today a fundamental and global concern that must be at the core of all
deliberations, actions and decisions on nuclear weapons. Following the significant and growing
cross-regional support for preventing the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapon detonations, as
manifested during the Oslo and Nayarit Conferences, in the NPT context and at the First Committee,
the challenge facing us is how to translate our resolve towards eliminating the threat posed by these
weapons into concrete action -- action that should be aimed at fulfilling our collective obligations
under Article VI of the NPT and the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear
weapons.
In this review cycle, we should build on the 2010 NPT Review Conference outcome document in
which 11the Conference expresses its deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences 
of any use of nuclear weapons and reaffirms the need for all States at all times to comply with
applicable international law, including international humanitarian law".
In achieving and maintaining a world free of nuclear weapons, the conclusion of a comprehensive
convention would establish a higher norm against nuclear weapons, thereby fulfilling the NPT
objectives. South Africa has also long supported a systematic and progressive approach to nuclear
disarmament, including through a framework of mutually reinforcing agreements. However, for this
latter approach to be credible, it has to consist of sustained, concrete progress on clearly
benchmarked steps that meet the nuclear disarmament principles of transparency, irreversibility
and verifiability, many of which have already been agreed, but are yet to be implemented.
Chairperson,
The Treaty remains the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
regime. The obligations under the Treaty were entered into on the basis of the historical bargain
between the nuclear- weapons States and the non-nuclear-weapon States in terms of which the
former undertook to eliminate their nuclear weapons based on the reciprocal undertaking by the
latter not to pursue the nuclear weapons option. The NPT reaffirms the inalienable right to the
peaceful use of nuclear science, technologies and applications. These three elements constitute the
subject matter of this Treaty.
In 2010, States Parties united behind an extensive Action Plan under all three Treaty pillars that in a
very concrete way demonstrated the continued commitment of States Parties to the NPT. The
reaffirmation of the continued validity of the 1995 and 2000 outcomes, particularly the unequivocal
commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals and the agreement to apply the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability in
fulfilment of Treaty obligations, provided renewed hope towards the achievement of the NPT's
overall objectives.
Chairperson,
The 2010 Action Plan aimed at accelerating the implementation of all Treaty provisions under all
three Treaty pillars. South Africa looks forward to receiving the report of the nuclear-weapon States
on actions they have taken to accelerate concrete progress on steps leading to nuclear disarmament
as agreed during 1995, 2000 and 2010. Concrete progress on these solemn undertakings is essential
to the success of the current review cycle.
We regret that beyond modest progress in the context of the New START agreement, not much
concrete progress has been achieved in the area of nuclear disarmament since 2010. Reductions
are indeed vital to removing the excessive destructive capabilities developed during the Cold War,
but do not substitute for concrete, transparent, irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament
measures.
The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems provide a clear
indication that some continue to harbour aspirations for the indefinite retention of these
instruments of destruction, contrary to their legal obligations and political commitments. 
Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, which is the only guarantee that they will never
be used, the provision of effective, legally-binding negative security assurances within the
framework of the NPT would be a pragmatic, interim and practical measure aimed at strengthening
the non-proliferation regime and contributing to the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
Chairperson,
South Africa maintains its principled position that it is the obligation of States Parties to accept
safeguards as required under Article Ill of the Treaty and urges all States that have yet to bring
comprehensive safeguards agreements into force, to do so as soon as possible in order to achieve
the universality of comprehensive safeguards. South Africa further reiterates its conviction that the
IAEA is the only internationally recognized competent authority responsible for verifying and
assuring compliance with safeguards agreements of States Parties.
Safeguards contribute to mutual confidence in the peaceful nature of a State's nuclear activities and
the absence of undeclared nuclear activities or material, which in turn would greatly facilitate the
transfer of nuclear technology and use of nuclear energy to the benefit of developing countries. At
the same time, it is essential that safeguards measures should not adversely affect the inalienable
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy as envisaged in Articles Ill and IV of the NPT. My
delegation is therefore encouraged by the progress that has been made since 2010 in terms of the
number of States that have now concluded Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional
Protocols. We also encourage further progress in the fulfilment of the 2010 Action Plan pertaining
to non-proliferation.
Chairperson,
South Africa reiterates its firm conviction that NWFZs play an important role in preventing the
proliferation both vertical and horizontal - of nuclear weapons and reaffirms its view that the
establishment of internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, enhances global and
regional peace and security and constitute important steps to strengthen the nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation regime.
South Africa views the 1995 resolution on the Middle East as part of the package of decisions that
enabled the indefinite extension of the Treaty in 1995 and we therefore urge all States to redouble
their efforts to ensure a gathering on this important issue involving all States of the region at the
earliest possible date.
Chairperson,
Peaceful nuclear co-operation and access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, constitute one of the core objectives of the Treaty. In giving effect
to Articles IV {1) and IV {2), South Africa therefore cautions against any decision that would amount
to a reinterpretation of, or restriction, on this inalienable right.
Nuclear power and the peaceful applications of nuclear technology, if optimised to the fullest, can
meaningfully enhance the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and could contribute
to the post-2015 UN development agenda. The inalienable right of the peaceful use of nuclear 
technology is of particular relevance and importance in attaining sustainable and accelerated
economic growth in Africa.
South Africa attaches great importance to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme which
contributes towards addressing the socio-economic needs and sustainable development challenges
of developing countries. The TC Programme is also a mechanism which enables the Agency to meet
its statutory objective of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world. Sufficient, assured and predictable TC funding
therefore remains a prior"1ty.
Chairperson,
My delegation will add more detail regarding our positions during the cluster debates.
South Africa supports the full implementation of the NPT and its universality in pursuit of the goal of
achieving a world entirely free from nuclear weapons. The strength, credibility and vitality of the
NPT rest on a fundamental bargain across its three pillars, which must be recognized and upheld.
Thank you. 