Check against Delivery
Statement by Ambassador Kwon Haeryong
Representative to the Conference on Disarmament
Permanent Mission of the Republic of Korea
to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other international
organizations
General Debate
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
April 23,2013 
Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin by adding my voice to the previous speakers that have congratulated
you on your assumption of chairmanship of the second meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference. My delegation is confident that
under your able leadership, this session will produce a hitful outcome. I would
like to assure you of our delegation's commitment to fully cooperate with you and
our NPT partners in ensuring the success of this Preparatory Committee Meeting
and the 20 15 review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT continues to be the cornerstone of the international nuclear nonproliferation
regime and a key element of the international security architecture.
For decades, the Treaty has helped us curb nuclear proliferation and served as an
essential foundation for the efforts to reduce existing nuclear arsenals. The
Republic of Korea believes that the three pillars that the NPT stands on -
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - are
mutually reinforcing, and should be promoted in a balanced manner. Encouraging
progress was made at the 2010 Review Conference, where Conclusions and
Recommendations containing 64 action items were adopted by the consensus of all
Parties. The Republic of Korea believes that the 2010 Action Plan, which is based
on a balanced approach to the three pillars of the NPT, provides a sound and
achievable blueprint for further advancement of the Treaty's objectives.
In spite of the positive developments, the global architecture of nuclear nonproliferation
is not without gaps and loopholes. Indeed, the international
community has witnessed some very serious challenges to the NPT and the global
non-proliferation regime in the recent years. These include, among others, concerns
over the nuclear programmes in North Korea and in Iran, insufficient progress in
nuclear disarmament, and the risk of nuclear weapons and related materials falling
into the hands of terrorists.
Of particular concern is the grave challenge posed by North Korea's continued
development of its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programs, including its
uranium enrichment activities. Despite the repeated warnings by the international
community, North Korea conducted its third nuclear test on 12 February 2013, 
posing a serious threat to the peace and security in the region and beyond and
threatening to undermine the very foundation of the NPT and the global nuclear nonproliferation
regime. In response to the test, 85 countries and international
organizations, including the United Nations, the IAEA, the European Union, ASEAN,
and the GCC, have either condemned or expressed concern, reflecting the
seriousness with which the international community regarded the event.
Furthermore, earlier this month North Korea announced that it would put all its
nuclear facilities, including its uranium enrichment program and its 5 MWe reactor
which Pyongyang had committed to disable under the October 2007 Agreement of
the Six-Party Talks, to use in expanding its nuclear arsenal. This is yet another
example of its habit of breaking promises, and the Republic of Korea expresses its
serious concern towards North Korea's unwavering determination to expand its
nuclear program.
My delegation would like to clearly stress that North Korea cannot have the status
of a nuclear-weapon state in accordance with the NPT in any case. The Republic of
Korea reaffis its commitment to resolving the North Korean nuclear issue in a
peaceful manner and strongly urges North Korea to abide by its international
commitments and obligations, including abandoning all its nuclear weapons and
existing nuclear programs. In addition, North Korea must realize that it will gain
nothing through its continued nuclear development which would only serve to
isolate itself even further.
Mr. Chairman,
It is my Delegation's firm belief that strengthening the NF'T and the global nuclear
nonproliferation regime is key to addressing the current challenges. I would like to
share some thoughts on the Republic of Korea's approach to reinforce the NPT and
further advance the Treaty's fundamental objectives.
First, implementation of the 2010 Action Plan must be given the highest policy
priority for all Parties. The Action Plan encompasses most of the NF'T issues,
reflects a balanced approach between all three pillars of the NPT, and contains
specific actions that each Party can take to contribute to the fundamental objectives
of the Treaty. Most importantly, the Action Plan reflects a common ground that all
Parties have agreed upon on the way forward. While some progress has been made 
in its implementation over the past three years, further efforts are required by all
NPT Parties to translate the Action Plan into concrete accomplishments.
Second, ensuring full compliance with non-proliferation obligations is vital for
sustaining and reinforcing the integrity of the NPT regime. In order to maintain and
bolster international confidence in the NPT, it must be made clear that noncompliance
with NPT obligations will have clear and strong consequences. In
particular, as the case of North Korea clearly demonstrates, the abuse of the
Treaty's Withdrawal provision may lead to consequences that seriously threaten the
credibility of the NPT regime. It is therefore essential that we continue to discuss
ways to properly address this issue in the 201 5 review cycle.
As many previous speakers have emphasized, my delegation believes that IAEA
safeguards play a crucial role in providing credible assurances of States'
compliance with their obligations. It is therefore essential that we continue our
efforts to seek universality of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
broaden adherence to the Additional Protocol.
Third, nuclear disarmament is crucial in our pursuit of the ultimate goal of a world
without nuclear weapons. In accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty, and as agreed
upon in 2010 Action Plan, nuclear-weapon States should accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament. At the same time, the entry of
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and start of negotiations on a
fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT) are two urgent, long-overdue tasks that we
cannot afford to put off any longer. The Republic of Korea urges the remaining
eight States whose ratification is required for the CTBT's entry into force to do so
without further delay, and also urges the Conference on Disarmament to start
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT) as a top priority.
Fourth, the Republic of Korea fully recognizes the inalienable right of all the
Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, and the importance of cooperation and exchange between States to
promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At the same time however, Korea believes
that the exercise of this right must be in conformity with non-proliferation and
safeguards obligations, and should be accompanied by appropriate and effective
levels of nuclear safety and security. 
Fifth, the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons to non-State actors has emerged
as one of the most challenging threats to global security in the 21St century. The
Republic of Korea strongly supports various international initiatives to tackle the
threat of nuclear terrorism, such as the Nuclear Security Summits, the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), the Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons of Mass Destruction (GP) and UN Security Council
resolution 1540. At the 2012 Seoul Nuclear Security Summit in March last year, 58
leaders of the world came together to adopt the Seoul Communique, which sets out
concrete steps and measures to strengthen nuclear and radiological security. The
Republic of Korea believes that commitments and measures agreed upon at the
Seoul Summit effectively complement and further concretize the 2010 Action Plan.
In the same vein, we also believe that the Hague Summit next year will produce
meaningful outcome to this end.
Lastly, the Republic of Korea takes note of the Almaty meeting between E3+3 and
Iran earlier this month, and welcomes the efforts undertaken by the relevant parties.
We call upon Iran to fully comply with relevant Security Council resolutions and to
take concrete steps to reassure the world about the peacell nature of its nuclear
programme. At the same time, the Republic of Korea believes parallel efforts
should be undertaken to advance the broader goal of peace and security in the
region, and in this respect supports the ongoing initiative and efforts to hold a
conference to discuss a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction. We
regret that the timeframe set by the 2010 Action Plan have not been met, but hope
that all relevant States engage in a serious manner to overcome their differences
and to create a more constructive environment to advance this agenda.
Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Korea firmly believes that adherence to and full compliance with
the NPT by all States is a prerequisite for achieving the goal of a safer world
without nuclear weapons. All Parties must accept responsibility for taking steps
both collectively and individually to advance the Treaty's three pillars and its
fundamental objectives. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its full commitment to the
NPT, and will spare no effort in our joint endeavors to make the 2015 review
process a success.
/End! 