Mr. Chairman,
First of all, let me congratulate you on behalf of my country and my own for your appointment as
Chairman of this last Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to The
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which, without any doubt, shall follow under
your leadership its successful path to 2015, that started in the Review Conference of the NPT in
2010, and followed in 2012 and 2013.
This third and last session of the Preparatory Committee of the Review Conference of 2015 is a
great opportunity, not only to take stock of the compliance of the Program of Action adopted in
2010, but also to insist on the fundamental task of this assembly: To fight for nuclear disarmament,
to emphasize non-proliferation policy and to defend the peaceful use of nuclear energy, reiterating
its commitment to the NPT and under the guardianship of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Spain wishes to reaffirm its commitment to the vision of a world without nuclear weapons as the
ultimate goal of this process in the framework of the NPT as a cornerstone of nuclear nonproliferation
and disarmament. Spain wishes to highlight the integral importance of each and every
one of the three pillars of the Treaty. In this regard, Spain, aware of the catastrophic effects that the
detonation of a nuclear weapon would have, urges the possessor States to strengthen their
commitment to nuclear disarmament, in pursuance of Article VI of the NPT, as well as delving into
non-proliferation policy, all of it taking advantage of nuclear energy under the assistance and
supervision of the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to highlight our priorities in this field:
- That all State Parties reaffirm their commitment to fulfill their obligations and reach all the
goals of the NPT, as well as to continue to move forward towards universal adherence to
and implementation of the Treaty.
-To reiterate the commitment to nuclear disarmament processes, in accordance with Article
VI of the NPT, considering the special responsibility of the States possessing the largest
arsenals. In this regard, Spain considers that the proposal of reducing by one-third the
amount of strategic weapons presented by the President of the United States in June 2013
is a positive step in that direction, which we welcome. We also welcome the agreements
reached between Russia and the United States on strategic arms reduction. We strongly
hope that the other nuclear-weapon possessing States take the necessary steps to move in
this direction. 
- 2014 marks 22 years since Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan made the commendable
decision of forgoing nuclear weapons that were inherited by the Soviet Union and to accede
to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. I would like to highlight the importance of this
decision and the relevance of the guarantees as to territorial integrity and security offered
thereafter to these States as important commitments that cannot be overlooked.
- Strengthen the non-proliferation regime, making sure that the signing and the ratification of
an agreement completed with safeguards and with the additional protocol be the standard
norm for verification.
- Promote the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty for its
importance in reducing the risk of accidents derived from the experimental detonation of
nuclear devices, as well as in avoiding environmental damages and limiting the arms race.
- The beginning of the negotiations in the Disarmament Conference of a Treaty on the
prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices as a crucial step towards meeting the obligations and final goal enshrined
in TNP's Article VI.
- Move forward in the fight against the asymmetric proliferation of nuclear weapons, avoiding
that they fall in the hands of non-state actors with terrorist purposes as well as strengthening
the aspects of nuclear physical security. In this regard, Spain has closely worked with other
countries in the fight against asymmetrical nuclear proliferation and in the prevention of
nuclear terrorism, starting from the actions that are reflected in the 2010 TNP Plan of Action
and by highlighting regional cooperation.
- There are other fora working to prevent the weapons of mass destruction from falling in the
hands on non-state actors with terrorist purposes and becoming new threats. In this regard,
I would like to mention the efforts made in fulfilling Security Council Resolution 1540 and the
achievements reflected in the Summit on Nuclear Security in The Hague. Moreover, the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism has also made a practical contribution in this
process.
- Reach a common agreement within the State Parties about the way of responding
effectively in the event of a withdrawal from the NPT of any of the State Parties.
- Make progress in the implementation of the NPT resolution of 1995 on the Middle East.
Spain would like to highlight the importance of convening a Conference for the
establishment of a Weapons of Mass Destruction Free Zone in the Middle East. We
encourage the facilitator of this Conference, the Ambassador Laajava of Finland, to continue
with his efforts for the organization of the process counting on the participation of all the
parties involved. These efforts are worth our trust, and we are sure that they will continue
advancing to achieve the convening of the Conference. Even though we would have liked
that the 2012 agreed date could have been achieved, Spain sees the conversations that
have taken place in Glion as a sign of development in the right direction.
Mr. Chairman,
The international context reinforces our certainty that the NPT is the backbone of the international
system of non-proliferation.
The crisis of nuclear proliferation in East Asia is worth our attention and concern, especially in light
of the recent events occurred in the Korean Peninsula. Spain condemns the nuclear explosions
conducted by the DPRK, as well as the launching of the short-range missiles that took place a few
months ago. Thus, we would like to call upon the Government of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to go back to the compliance of the provisions of the NPT, to meet the Safeguards
Agreement concluded with the IAEA and to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. 
Regarding Iran, Spain welcomes the agreement reached on the 23rd of November 2013
establishing a Plan of Action negotiated with Iran by the EU3+3, which determined a number of
measures to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear program. We hope that the
agreed measures be fully met, which would allow moving in the right direction to restore the full
confidence of the internationally community about the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear program
under IAEA supervision. We encourage Iran to continue in this path.
Mr. Chairman,
The world looks with hope at meetings like this one today, to move forward towards a rigorous
implementation of the NPT by adopting concrete, effective, pragmatic and consensual measures to
intensify international efforts against proliferation, to act in favour of disarmament and to ensure the
responsible development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Spain is confident that this meeting wil l bring positive results. Our work since 2010 in the
implementation of the Action Plan is the light that should guide us, as we must advance as much as
possible in its development to arrive at the Review Conference of 2015 with a renewed optimism
and a new horizon.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, 