Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations and other International Organizations
in Geneva, Switzerland
Statement by H.E. Ravinatha Aryasinha
Ambassador/Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka
at the
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee to the
Mon-Proliferation Treaty
2znd April 2813 
My delegation at the outset wishes to extend its congratulations to you on your
election as Chairman of the Second Preparatory Committee of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference. We assure you our fullest cooperation in your work. We are
hopeful that under your able leadership and guidance, the Committee will
achieve success.
My country is fully committed to the nuclear non-proliferation commitments of
the NPT. We have steadfastly and consistently supported the global initiatives
on non-proliferation. Nuclear non-proliferation however, remains one of the
three pillars of the NPT, which requires equal attention. A balanced approach in
addressing non-proliferation, promotion of safe and secure use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, and nuclear disarmament, is therefore imperative. Such an
approach, my delegation believes, is a necessary step on the road map to
achieving the ultimate goal of all State parties gathered here today, a world free
of nuclear weapons. It is against this backdrop that Sri Lanka encourages the
implementation of the 13 practical steps agreed on to meet the disarmament
commitments during the 2000 Review Conference to advance progressively
towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Sri La&a continues to be concerned about the existence of nuclear weapons and
of their possible use or threat of use, as it poses a menace to humanity. It is Sri
Lanka's belief, that a transparent, sustainable and credible plan for multilateral
nuclear disarmament is required in order to achieve our ultimate goal. In this
context, Sri Lanka is committed to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and the early entry into force of this instrument. We also recognize that
the Fissile Material Cut off Treaty (FMCT) is a means to addressing the
proliferation of fissile material which amounts to nuclear weapon proliferation,
and that it is imperative to begin negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament 
on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and effectively verifiable treaty that bans
the production of fissile material for manufacturing of nuclear weapons and
other nuclear explosive devices. We believe that these instruments would assist
in controlling the proliferation of nuclear arsenals.
The importance of strengthening the Nuclear Disarmament mechanism is
evident in recent activities which have taken place contrary to International Law.
The situation which prevails in the Korean Peninsula reminds us of the urgency
of the call for the total elimination of nuclear weapons since we firmly believe
that total elimination of nuclear weapons from the world is the only possible way
for the survival of humanity. It is for this reason that we continue the stress that
states should move forward towards total elimination and the absolute ban of
the nuclear arsenal.
Sri Lanka welcomes the establishment of nuclear weapons free zones in Latin
America and the Caribbean (treaty of Tlatelolco), South Pacific (treaty of
Rarotonga), Southeast Asia (Bangltolt treaty) and Africa (Pelindaba treaty) in
accordance with the guidelines of the United Nations Disarmament Commission.
I recall that Sri Lanka supported the proposal of establishing a nuclear weapons
free zone in the Middle East. We continue to extend that support. The early
convening of the Conference on a Middle East Zone Free of Weapons of Mass
Destruction, which was postponed in December 2012 is important. Sri Lanka
appreciates the increased cooperation among States to establish nuclear weapons
free zones, and considers this as an indication of the commitment of States
towards achieving a world free of nuclear weapons.
Sri Lai~lca recognizes as siipulated in Article IV of the NPT, the fundamental
right of the parties to the NPT to develop, research, produce and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purpose without discrimination and in conformity wit11 
articles I and I1 of the treaty. While it is the right of an individual State to pursue
such an option when it chooses to, it is imperative to acknowledge that the
primary responsibility for nuclear safety and nuclear security rests with
individual States. We believe it is the responsibility of States to cooperate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) by complying with its
objectives. We strongly support nuclear capability verification under the
framework of the IAEA Statute and the NPT. In this connection, the required
safeguards should be implemented in a manner designed to comply with Article
IV of the Treaty.
While acknowledging the valuable contribution extended by the IAEA through
its technical cooperation programme, in the areas of human heath, agriculture
and rural development, advance water resource management, environmental
protection, nuclear safety and nuclear energy, Sri Lanka particularly encourages
the IAEA to strengthen the technical cooperation programme in assisting
developing States parties in the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Sri Lanka attaches great importance to the Second Session of the Preparatory
Committee as this would lay a strong foundation for a successful Review
Conference of NPT in 2015. I believe the commitment and political will of all
State parties are essential to achieving a positive and solid outcome in this new
review cycle of NPT, and to accomplish the ultimate goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons.
I thank you. 