Postal address Telephone E-mail
SE-103 39 Stockholm +46 8 405 10 00 foreign.registrator@gov.se
SWEDEN
Visitors' address Fax
Fredsgatan 6 +46 8 723 11 76
NPT PrepCom 2014, General Debate – Statement by Sweden
Mr Chairman,
Congratulations on assuming the important task of chairing this
thirdPrepCom.I assure you of the full cooperation of the Swedish
delegation.
Sweden fully subscribes to the statement made by the European
Union. I will now make some additional points from a national
perspective.
Mr Chairman,
Sweden joined the NPT to improve national, regional and
global security through nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.
As you may know, Sweden had a nuclear R&D program in the 1950s
and 60s. It took us some years to come to the decision that we would
be more secure and better serve international security, if we were to
give up this program. We chose to do so and to work together with
others, including those countries that possessed nuclear weapons, to
achieve a comprehensive and solid disarmament and nonproliferation
regime. Sweden signed the NPT when it was opened for
signature in 1968. We have never regretted this decision.
The NPT is the cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, and for efforts to eventually achieve a world without
nuclear weapons. The three mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT -
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy- remain a sound and strong basis for this work. Over the
years, the Treaty has been reinforced by commitments made in the


Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Sweden 
Ministry for ForeignAffairs 2(4)

Review Conferences, most notably in 1995, in 2000 and in 2010. It is
essential that commitments on all three pillars are implemented
through concrete action by all States. This ensures both a successful
outcome of the review cycles and the strengthening of the
international non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
Mr Chairman,
It is essential in our view that we continue to build an increasingly
robust framework of mutually reinforcing and complementary
treaties, institutions and commitments – a building block approach
that unyieldingly narrows the margin for nuclear weapons in
international peace and security.
This approach is further elaborated in the working paper “Building
Blocks for a World without Nuclear Weapons” submitted by 20 states,
including Sweden.
Mr Chairman,
The opportunities for nuclear disarmament have to be fully seized.
Old postures and alert levels largely remain as they did during the
Cold War, as does the reliance on nuclear deterrence. This
contravenes the growing understanding of the need to further disarm
in order to enhance security and improve human development.
Additional steps can be taken: Sweden calls on the nuclear weapon
states to make further deep reductions in their arsenals of nuclear
weapons–strategic and non-strategic, deployed and non-deployed –
in order to fulfill their obligations under the NPT and other
agreements. Sweden is particularly concerned about the continued
existence of sub-strategic nuclear weapons in our own region, and
urges all parties concerned to take steps so as to reduce this threat.
Sweden believes that negotiations on nuclear disarmament, in order
to be effective, have to include those countries that possess nuclear
weapons. It also seems necessary that such negotiations address both
humanitarian and security-related aspects.
Mr Chairman, 
Ministry for ForeignAffairs 3(4)

The CTBT is a crucial element for both nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Since handing over the torch as Article XIV
Coordinator last year, Sweden continues to promote the CTBT. We
recently hosted a meeting in Stockholm of the Group of Eminent
Persons, which focuses on new and innovative approaches for
bringing the Treaty into force.Our technical support for the CTBT
verification regime continues, including through further development
of the noble gas system SAUNA to help detect underground nuclear
explosions.
The FMCT is another essential building block, which is long overdue.
It is very welcome that the Group of Governmental Experts has
recently begun its important work in Geneva.
Sweden is an active member of the IAEA Board of Governors. We
strive to strengthen the IAEA Safeguards System and Additional
Protocols and uphold the Agency’s important role in global efforts to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. We have recently made a
voluntary contribution of100 000 euros to the Agency’s enhanced
monitoring and verification efforts in Iran in support of the Joint Plan
of Action. To date, Sweden has also contributed 550 000 euros to the
crucial IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative.
Nuclear security needs to be promoted both at home and abroad.
Since the early 1990s, Sweden has contributed to a number of joint
efforts to strengthen nuclear security and promote nuclear nonproliferation
in Russia, Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova. In2013, we
allocated more than 5 million euros to projects in these countries. We
are also pleased to be among those states that have contributed to
nuclear security by transferring fissile material for secure disposal.
Sweden has signed the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and intends to ratify the Convention later
on this year.
A working paper on Safeguards, nuclear security, peaceful uses, export
controls and the CTBT has been presented to this conference by
Sweden and others in the Vienna Group of Ten. 
Ministry for ForeignAffairs 4(4)

Mr Chairman,
It is all too clear that the use of nuclear weapons would have
catastrophic and enduring consequences, for humans, animals and
plants worldwide. As long as these weapons are retained and spread
to new countries and actors, therisk remains that they one day will be
used. The solution is self-evident: a world without nuclear weapons.
But however much we may wish to make short-cuts on that route,
there are none. The road ahead will be cumbersome.
Countries that possess nuclear weapons will need to come to the
conclusion that national, regional and international security will be
better served without nuclear weapons.Non-nuclear weapon states
will need to work with the nuclear powers to help them achieve this.
And all countries need to strengthen their non-proliferation
commitments. New constructive approaches are needed, stronger
engagement by all nations and a ceaseless commitment to the end
goal.
Thank you. 