Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of my delegation, I would first of all like to congratulate you on your assumption of the chair of our
committee and to assure you of our full support.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is an essential instrument to strengthen peace and
stability in the world. Since it entered into force more than forty years ago, this treaty has largely contributed
to limiting the risks of proliferation. It has greatly contributed to protecting humanity from the devastating
effects that any use of nuclear weapons would have had. It is therefore in our shared interest to ensure that
its review process does not follow a path that alternates between success and failure, but rather one that
leads to a steady reinforcement of the treaty.
The Review Conference next year will allow us to assess the results of the implementation of our
commitments with regard to the three pillars of the NPT. It will also be an opportunity to focus more closely
on the challenges confronting the treaty and to discuss ways to strengthen its implementation. One year from
this important deadline, it would therefore seem useful first of all to get a clear picture of the situation and
then to determine possible paths leading to 2015. To do this, additional efforts by the States Parties to
achieve transparency are essential. Switzerland has therefore submitted, for a second time, a national report
on the implementation of the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference.
Mr Chairman,
From our perspective, the biggest challenges to the NPT concern the areas of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament.
Regarding nuclear non-proliferation, it is undeniable that there have been some encouraging developments.
Among these, I would first of all like to mention the Iranian nuclear issue which has been undergoing a real
negotiation process since the Joint Plan of Action agreed in Geneva in November 2013. It will clearly take a
long time for this process to materialise in the form of a final agreement. However, the latest developments
show that this issue can be moved forward by diplomatic means. I would also like to mention the
consultations on the conference on the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. Although this conference has yet to be convened, the key actors are already involved in a
process of substantive dialogue organised by the facilitator. Switzerland encourages the states in the region
to continue to engage in constructive discussions so that these first steps can lead to a process that will
result in the implementation of the resolution adopted in 1995. Finally, I would like to mention the results
achieved in the field of nuclear security at the Summit in The Hague last March and at the IAEA Ministerial
Conference in July 2013 as further positive developments.
If we compare these encouraging developments to the lack of additional significant progress in the area of
nuclear disarmament, we see a clear imbalance in the implementation of the commitments contained in the
three pillars of the NPT. 
With reference to the 2010 Action Plan, overall progress in nuclear disarmament has clearly not lived up to
expectations. At this stage we do not see any sign of a decisive change in the nuclear doctrines of the
nuclear-weapon states or in the composition of their nuclear arsenals. On the contrary, we note that the
nuclear-weapon states are pursuing the qualitative development of their nuclear weapons and that they are
maintaining large arsenals.
This imbalance is all the more regrettable since the non-nuclear-weapon states have committed themselves
- within the scope of their means - to promoting processes favouring nuclear disarmament. Among these
efforts, I would like to mention in particular the approach that focuses on the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons. This dimension, which has been firmly anchored in the NPT since the very beginning, and which
stems directly from the 2010 final document, constitutes an essential path which all states parties should
explore. Switzerland sees the non-participation of the nuclear-weapon states in this discussion and their
absence from the open-ended working group (OEWG) as a missed opportunity that would have enabled
them to demonstrate leadership and their commitment to nuclear disarmament.
Mr Chairman,
One year from the 2015 Review Conference, the NPT is confronted by serious challenges. On the one hand,
a substantial number of actions have not been implemented. On the other hand, there are significant
differences among the States Parties regarding their understanding of the deadline and the way in which
these actions are to be carried out. We should therefore use this session of the Preparatory Committee to
look to the future, to launch a process of reflection, and to determine the directions to take in 2015 - and
beyond- in order to resolve this lack of implementation.
Switzerland is of the view that, with the 2010 Action Plan, we have a good starting point. This Action Plan
and the commitments contained in the final documents of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences should
therefore remain our road map. Switzerland proposes the following approach :
• we must first of all clearly identify those commitments that have not been fulfilled.
we must then define measures with a clear timeframe in order to accelerate the implementation of the
unfulfilled commitments during the next review cycle.
In other words, we must define more precisely the direction our future efforts should take. This also includes
the development of new ideas and concepts with a view to implementing our commitments across the three
pillars of the NPT. The success of the 2015 Review Conference is our collective responsibility.
Thank you for your attention. 