Mr. President
I wish to congratulate you and the Bureau for your election to preside over this Conference. The United Republic of Tanzania delegation has complete trust in your leadership and will render full support to you and your Bureau throughout this Conference. My delegation associates itself with the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Cameroon on behalf of the African Group and by the Honourable Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, H.E. Dr. Marty Nataligawa on behalf of the Non-Aligned group.
Mr. President
We welcome the opening statement by the Secretary General and endorse fully his five point benchmarks for the success of this 8th Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference following the disappointing outcome of the last Review Conference in 2005. Tanzania looks to this Conference as an opportunity to marshal and inject the much needed political will to make the NPT a unique instrument and framework for moving forward the process of nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation by building on and improving the "Thirteen Practical Steps" adopted ten years ago. We should also use this opportunity to revitalize the Conference on disarmament to address all pending and emerging issues on nuclear disarmament including the production and spread of fissile materials for nuclear weapons in the hands of non-state actors and terrorist groups.
Mr. President
The world is at a cross road of two trends; One is the unprecedented positive trend towards nuclear disarmament since the end of the Cold War. The START Agreement between the United States and Russia to reduce significantly their respective nuclear stock piles ushers in a new era of hope and renewed global expectations for a world free from the threat and fear of a nuclear holocaust. The articulation of a vision of a world without nuclear weapons by President Obama should be ceased by this Conference to make the vision an irreversible universal commitment by all nuclear power States and the international community as a whole.
When Tanzania had hesitated to accede to the NPT forty years ago, it was not for any dream of one day developing nuclear weapons, but it was a political statement to the world that if the NPT is to succeed, it had first and foremost to address the
reduction and elimination of existing nuclear stockpiles of nuclear States which then we increasing horizontally and vertically underpinned by ever threatening nuclear deterrence doctrines. We acceded to the NPT as the Cold war thawed and nuclear weapon stockpiling stopped with a new hope for reduction. Now we see path-breaking development and our support for the NPT and commitment to non-proliferation regime is reinvigorated and reinforced. We welcome the positive
l
developments on a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the new initiatives on verifiable Fissile Material Cut off Treaty.
Mr. President
Tanzania is convinced on the value of Universal adherence to the NPT to add momentum to the new prospects for a nuclear free world. On the other hand, we are concerned by the negative trend in the spread of nuclear weapons which has taken place since the NPT regime came into force and the international tension which has ensured as the United Nations seeks to strengthen and enforce the NPT regime through the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We believe that the issue of peaceful use of nuclear energy can be collectively worked in a transparent manner and the necessary controls for fissile materials agreed upon through the NPT framework. Unilateral action can only engender regional and international suspicions and tension. A variety of confidence building measures need to be added to this process.
As a developing country, Tanzania sees the immense value of nuclear energy as a source of power and new technologies for achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and applying nuclear technologies for future development in areas like food production, addressing adverse impacts of climate change and uses in medical uses and related science. Tanzania with vast proven resources of Uranium will continue to work with the IAEA to develop nuclear technologies while sharing uranium with others in a responsible way with a view to strengthening the NPT regime and advocating the access to avoid the peaceful uses of nuclear technologies.
Mr. President
Africa continues to make a collective effort to strengthen the NPT regime through regional approaches and initiatives. In 1995, African Union initiated the African Nuclear-Weapon Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba) to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, promote cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy, disarmament and to enhance regional peace and security. The Treaty entered into force in July 2009 and the African Union is now proceeding to establish the African Commission on Nuclear Energy for peaceful uses and development of its member States.
Tanzania welcomes the announced participation of the United States in the Pelindaba Treaty and encourages the formation and effective work of other Nuclear Weapons Free Zones in other areas including the perennially volatile region of the Middle East. We hope this Conference will provide added momentum towards these regional initiatives as building blocks towards a world free from the fear and scourge of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



