1 At the outset, I would like to join other delegations to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Thailand has full confidence in your able leadership and can assure you of our full support. Thailand associates itself with the statement made by Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We would tike to take this opportunity to share with the meeting our views on some of the key issues as follows:
2.	First, universality and full implementation of the Treaty. Like other States Parties to the NPT, Thailand shares a common vision of a world free of nuclear weapons. It has always been our firm belief that it is in the best interest of both Nuclear Weapon States and Non-Nuclear Weapon States to join hands and work together towards a common goal, which is the complete elimination of all weapons of mass destruction.
3.	The challenges ahead towards this goal are indeed daunting. But Thailand believes that it is still achievable if, and only if, there is sufficient and sustained political will from all parties concerned. At this moment, while all of us are still eagerly waiting for the so-called "green otYshoots" in our economies that would signify the beginning of economic recovery, Thailand believes, after a long period of stagnation and impasse, "green offshoots" have, perhaps, begun to emerge in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation following the recent policy announcement by the new United States Administration on this critical issue and the recent agreement reached between Presidents of the United States and the Russian Federation the two largest Nuclear Weapon States -to work together to fulfill their obligations under Article VI of the NPT and demonstrate their leadership in reducing the number of nuclear weapons in the world. We welcome these "green offshoots", and call on the parties concerned to seize this positive momentum and build upon it to ensure effective implementation of their common pledge, the success of which would certainly create conducive environment for an international consensus to further strengthen the NPT in the upcoming Review Conference and beyond. We would also like to reiterate our support for the UNSG's 5-point proposal on nuclear disarmament,

which, we believe, could serve as a useful set of guidelines for working towards a goal of total elimination of nuclear weapons.
4.	Second, miclear-vveapon-free zones and negative security assurances Thailand has attached great importance to the maintenance of peace and stability in Southeast Asia and beyond. For this fundamental reason, Thailand has been an active proponent of the Bangkok Treaty, which established the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ). At the time when it entered into force, SEANWFZ was the first nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty in Asia. Today, the Bangkok Treaty, which has served as a fundamental framework for non-proliferation and nuclear safety regime in Southeast Asia for more than a decade, has already been signed and ratified by all ten Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). In this regard, it is Thailand's earnest hope that Nuclear Weapon States would soon be able to accede to the Protocol to SEANWFZ.
5.	As the depository of the SEANWFZ, Thailand attaches great importance to the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zone in all regions of the world. Thailand welcomes the significant initiative of Mongolia to promote cooperation among existing nuclear-weapon-free zones by hosting a meeting of focal points of nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties and Mongolia in April 2009. Thailand participated in the said meeting as the focal point of the Bangkok Treaty, and found the meeting very useful. We also welcome the entry into force of the Treaty of Semipalatinsk that created the Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone, and encourage similar initiatives on other regions. It is our belief that, one after another, these different jigsaws of regional nuclear-weapon-free zones will gradually create a positive dynamics towards limiting the scope of nuclear weapons in the world.
6.	Third, peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The recent global energy crisis was a wake-up call for many countries worldwide, especially those that have been heavily dependent on energy import from abroad or possess a limited amount of energy resources. The growing awareness of the threat from climate change has also brought home to many countries problems caused by inefficient and unsustainable pattern of energy consumption. These pressing factors have resulted in an increasing need for countries around the world to turn to peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a means to diversify their respective sources of
energy and provide a sort of insurance for their future energy security. From our perspective, Thailand believes that it is an inalienable right of all States to develop all aspects of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes without discrimination, as long as it is in accordance with the obligations under the NPT.
7.	And it is within this context that Thailand has joined many countries around the world in considering a possibility of launching a nuclear power programme as part of our national energy mix. In so doing, an international cooperation would play a crucial role in further strengthening our national efforts to utilize nuclear power as a clean, secure and efficient source of energy.
8.	At the same time, we cannot stress enough the importance of nuclear safety and security as essential elements to ensure public confidence, which is critical for the eventual success of any given nuclear programme. In this connection, Thailand is of the view that the IAEA should be further strengthened to promote scientific and technical cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as technology transfer to its developing Member States, while ensuring that the requirements of nuclear safety and security are fully observed.
9.	Last but not least, Thailand hopes that, despite many pressing challenges, this session would be able to successfully seize the opportunity presented by the recent positive momentum and move ahead towards forging a consensus on key substantial recommendations for the Review Conference. We look forward to working closely with delegations to achieve this common goal in the next two weeks. I thank you, Mr. Chairman