 PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
351 EAST 52ND STREET· NEW YORK, NY 10022
 TEL (212) 754-2230 • FAX (212) 688-3029
 Statement by
His Excellency Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Thailand
to the United Nations
at the General Debate of the Third Session of the Preparatory
Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
New York, 29 April 2014
Please check against delivery
Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished delegates,
 I join the other speakers in congratulating you on your election as Chair of the
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee. This will be the last Session of the Preparatory
Committee before the next NPT Review Conference. Therefore it holds a special significance as
well as the opportunity to reaffirm our political will in ensuring a successful Review
Conference. We trust in your able leadership to steer this important session. You can be
assured of my delegation’s full support and cooperation.
 At the outset, Thailand aligns itself with the statement made yesterday by His
Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned
Movement.
Mr. Chairman,
Thailand believes that despite having diverging views, consensus on actions must
come from the recognition that both nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states share
a common goal and responsibility for the achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons. If
that forms the basis of our work in the coming two weeks, it is our hope that our deliberations
will produce practical and meaningful outcomes. We must also recognize and constantly remind
ourselves of the importance of continuing our work and efforts on all three interrelated and
mutually reinforcing pillars of the NPT – nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and
promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Despite the delays and obstacles that we may
face in any of the three pillars, we must build on all positive contributions in order to build
enough political will and create the momentum necessary to achieve our common goals.
Mr. Chairman,
Since we last met at the Second Session of the Preparatory Commission in
Geneva last year, discussions in various multilateral forums have maintained the momentum in
pushing the disarmament agenda forward. The first-ever High-level meeting of the General
Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament last September and the subsequent adoption of UNGA
resolution 68/32 on the follow-up to that meeting was instrumental in galvanizing the necessary
political will to reinvigorate actions in this area. The convening of the Open-ended Working
Group in Geneva also helped to develop thought-provoking proposals to take forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations. Finally, the Second International Conference on
the Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons held in Mexico earlier this year reminded
us all of the critical need and responsibility of the international community to move the
disarmament agenda forward.
Thailand looks forward to exploring further the proposals that have been put forth
at these important meetings in a concrete and practical manner. We also look forward to the
convening of the high-level international conference scheduled for 2018 to assess progress
achieved in nuclear disarmament.
Mr Chairman,
It is highly unfortunate, therefore, that despite our collective efforts to reenergize 
 discussions and explore further proposals, the international community has yet to act on the
already endorsed mandate to embark on discussions for a nuclear weapon free zone in the
Middle East. As the depository state and an active proponent of the Bangkok Treaty which
established the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone or SEANWFZ, we strongly support
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all other regions. We hope that despite the
delays, tangible progress with regard to discussions for a zone in the Middle East can be made
ahead of the 2015 Review Conference.
At the same time, we must also redouble our efforts in other areas, including
discussions on the commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile
material and the early conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention. There are
perhaps other areas that we have yet to explore further, such as engaging more in public
outreach. In this respect, we look forward to activities worldwide to mark the very first
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons in September later this year.
Mr. Chairman,
In the area of non-proliferation, we are heartened by continuing efforts to
enhance capacity in this area. In addition to participating actively in the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism, Thailand was also pleased to co-host a table top exercise with the
United States in Bangkok last August focused on improving national capabilities and bilateral
cooperation on maritime and air interdiction within the framework of the Proliferation Security
Initiative. We also look forward to participating in the CTBTO Regional Conference for States
in Southeast Asia and the Pacific in Indonesia later in May.
Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right of States Parties to develop and use nuclear energy in a safe,
secure and peaceful manner in accordance with obligations under article IV as well as other
relevant provisions of the NPT is well recognized by all States Parties to the NPT. For Thailand,
we also recognize that responsibilities come with that right. Thailand was therefore pleased to
report at the Second PrepCom in Geneva last year, on our efforts to establish a network of
nuclear regulatory bodies within the Southeast Asian region called ASEANTOM. ASEANTOM
is intended as a forum to enhance issues of safety, security and safeguards in accordance with
IAEA standards and practices. ASEANTOM met formally for the first time in Phuket last
September, concluded and adopted its Terms of Reference and agreed on an action plan. In
January this year, members of ASEANTOM also engaged in informal consultations with the
European Commission on a project to develop an integrated security system for nuclear and
radioactive materials. Finally, Thailand was pleased to participate in the Nuclear Security
Summit in The Hague. We were glad to have contributed by hosting the Sherpa Meeting in
Pattaya which prepared the Hague Communique adopted thereafter.
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation remains hopeful that the challenges we face can be surmounted if we
show the necessary political will. Here, I wish to reaffirm my delegation’s commitment to 
working with all delegations in order to reach a comprehensive and balanced outcome document.
If we all work together, we can ensure that this last Session ends on a positive and meaningful
note ahead of the 2015 Review Conference.
Thank you. 