 Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA
48 COTTAGEGASSE 1180 VIENNA
TEL (431) 478 3335 • FAX (431) 478 2907
Statement by
H.E. Mr. Songsak Saicheua,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Thailand to
the United Nations and other International Organizations
in Vienna,
at the General Debate,
the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
2 May 2017, Vienna
Mr. Chair,
1. As this is the first time Thailand is taking the floor, allow me to join other
delegations in congratulating you on your assumption as the Chair of the First
Session of the Preparatory Committee of the 2020 NPT Review Conference.
My congratulations also go to other members of the Bureau. I am confident
that under your able leadership and guidance, this meeting will certainly result
in a successful conclusion which will positively contribute towards the 2020
Review Conference. We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Kim Won Soo for his tireless efforts to disarmament and congratulate
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu on her appointment as the new Under-SecretaryGeneral
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs. I assure you of
the full support of my delegation.
2. Thailand also wishes to associate itself with the statement made by the
distinguished delegate of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM) States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT).
3. As the only treaty which addresses the three equally important issues of
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, Thailand would like to reemphasize that the NPT remains the
cornerstone of the multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We
support the universal adherence of the NPT and strengthening of all its three
mutually reinforcing pillars, which should be equally addressed in a balanced
manner.
Mr. Chair,
4. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are shared global responsibilities
of all countries. Thailand welcomes all progress to break the impasse and
create positive momentum to push the agenda forward. Amidst continuing call
from the international community for the prompt and effective
implementation in good faith of Article VI, Thailand welcomes and has
participated in the United Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards their total
elimination. Thailand encourages the constructive participation of all
stakeholders in an inclusive manner. We also appreciate the efforts made on
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other
explosive devices, marked by the convening of a high level fissile material
cut-off treaty (FMCT) expert preparatory group earlier in March.
5. Cooperation amongst different nuclear-weapon-free zones, encompassing 115
countries, is an important confidence building measure and contributes
significantly to the strengthening of the global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
regime as stipulated in Article VII of the NPT. As an active
proponent and the depositary state of the Bangkok Treaty, which established 
the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ), Thailand
supports the establishment of nuclear weapon-free zones in all other regions.
We welcome progress made by the States Parties and the nuclear-weapon
States towards the signing of the Protocol to the SEANWFZ, which will
enhance the effectiveness of the agreement at the regional and the global
levels. Thailand would also like to urge all parties concerned to fully support
the early discussions on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction as mandated by the 2010 NPT
Review Conference.
6. Closer to home, we are gravely concerned with the DPRK’s nuclear weapon
and ballistic missile programs as well as the growing tension on the Korean
Peninsula. Thailand calls for the effective implementation of all relevant
UNSC resolutions, and discourages any further provocative and
destabilizing actions in Northeast Asia. We unequivocally support
political and diplomatic means to resolve this issue peacefully. We also
fully subscribe to ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Statement on the situation in
the Korean Peninsula on 28 April 2017.
Mr. Chair,
7. The inalienable right of States Parties to develop and use nuclear energy in a
safe, secure, and peaceful manner in accordance with obligations under
Article IV as well as other relevant provisions of the Treaty is well recognized
and must be respected by all States Parties to the NPT. We also recognize the
responsibilities that come with that right as we continue our endeavour to
enhance nuclear safety, security, and safeguards at the national, regional, and
international levels.
8. Verifiable and efficient safeguards are important for both nuclear-weapons and
non-nuclear-weapon States to ensure that nuclear technology will be used
exclusively for peaceful purposes. We welcome transparency and confidence
building measures by nuclear-weapon States concerning their nuclear
stockpiles as a part of nuclear disarmament process, and encourage additional
efforts in this regard. As the key mechanism in this regime, the IAEA should
also be empowered to further strengthen its role in nuclear safeguards and
verification.
9. For Thailand, we value and appreciate the collaboration with the IAEA in
technical cooperation programme, and will continue to cooperate closely with
the IAEA to promote and utilise nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to
help increase prosperity for all. 
Mr. Chair,
10. Emerging security challenges and uncertainties in international politics
have brought us to a critical juncture where commitment and cooperation on
disarmament and international security are ever more important. For many
decades, the NPT has been helping to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons
and weapons technology, to promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, and to further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament.
However, in principle, having one nuclear arsenal is having one too many.
As long as a nuclear warhead exists, the entire human race and all lives on the
planet will never be free from the risk of indiscriminate and devastating effect
of nuclear weapons. With strong political will and practical undertakings,
together we can achieve a lot more.
11. NPT States Parties should remain committed to the Treaty. Withdrawal
should be allowed only in extraordinary circumstances and with strict
conditions. The lack of outcomes and the lack of progress in the
implementation of the outcomes of the previous NPT Review Conferences
have affected the relevance, credibility, and sanctity of the NPT. The agreed
outcomes of the previous NPT Review Conferences should provide solid
groundwork for us to build on to ensure the success of the 2020 NPT Review
Conference. We should learn from the experience of 2015 Review
Conference and not only aim for any consensus outcome document, but a
substantive, meaningful, comprehensive and actionable one that will actually
bring changes for the betterment of us all.
12. At the same time, it is also important to involve every State possessing
nuclear weapons that falls outside the ambit of NPT in disarmament and nonproliferation
discussions through various possible channels such as IAEA
programmes, Nuclear Security Contact Group and other initiatives,
UNSCR1540, and other outreach efforts.
13. In support of the NPT process, we wish to underscore the importance of
promoting awareness and understanding of the issues at hand, including
education for younger generation. This is crucial not only for decision
makers, but also the general public. The message is not only to illustrate the
danger of nuclear weapons and their catastrophic humanitarian consequences,
but also to correct misconceptions and fears concerning the application of
peaceful nuclear technology.
14. In this regard, Thailand would also like to acknowledge and highlight the
contributions of civil society and the academia in mobilizing public support
and shaping public perception. We would like to encourage continued
participation of these sectors of society who have already done much to get us
where we are today.
15. In closing, Thailand remains hopeful that we will be able to produce
substantive progress and encourages all States Parties work in good faith,
with the spirit of flexibility and mutual respect, in order to realise our
common aspiration of a peaceful and safer world free of nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.
--------------------------------