I join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your election as President of the 2010 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. My congratulations also go to the other members of the Bureau. My delegation has no doubt that with your able leadership and guidance - and the flexibility of every delegation - this conference will arrive at a successful conclusion. You have my delegation's full cooperation and support.
Thailand associates itself with the statements made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia on behalf of the Non Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT and by the Deputy Foreign Minister of Vietnam on behalf of ASEAN. Mr. President, let me now share Thailand's views on a few points, as follows:
Universality of the Treaty
Thailand shares the desire for a world free of nuclear weapons. It is in the interests of both Nuclear Weapon States and Non-Nuclear Weapon States to work together toward the ultimate goal of the complete elimination of all weapons of mass destruction.
Forty years after its entry into force, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of international efforts on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. While the vast number of States Parties to the NPT reflects international support for nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation, universal adherence to the NPT continues to elude us. We must keep working to bring all remaining countries into the Treaty. In the meantime, it is essential that there be a balanced emphasis and non-discriminatory implementation of the three pillars of the NPT - disarmament, non-proliferation, and peaceful uses. This 2010 NPT Review Conference must reaffirm States Parties's commitment to strengthening each and every one of the three pillars.
Thailand supports the UNSG's 5-point proposal on nuclear disarmament of 24 October 2008 and welcomes the 5 benchmarks for success he put forward in his statement at the opening session of this Conference.
Nuclear Disarmament
The 2010 NPT Review Conference must reaffirm the obligations of States Parties under Article VI relating to nuclear disarmament and to general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control. Practical steps towards nuclear disarmament by all nuclear-weapon States are important for the ongoing efforts in this field.
We welcome the recent signing of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms on 8 April 2010 as an important step forward in nuclear disarmament.
It is important that the 2010 NPT Review Conference push for the early commencement of negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. It must urge the Conference on Disarmament to adopt and implement its Programme of Work as soon as possible to allow for the immediate commencement of the substantive work, including negotiations of such a treaty. Also, negotiations of any future treaty on disarmament and non-proliferation should be inclusive, given its universal impact as well as promote universal compliance.J. Nuclear-weapons-free zones and negative security assurances
As a State Party to the Treaty on the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ), Thailand supports the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones in different regions. Nuclear-weapon-free zones reinforce the political commitment not to develop nuclear weapons in the respective regions and also play a pivotal role in enhancing the security of member states within the zones and serve as a confidence building measure in the region. Complementary to the objectives of the NPT, such zones contribute to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the promotion of enhanced cooperation for peaceful use of nuclear energy and are an important and practical step towards realizing a nuclear weapon-free world.
It is also our belief that non-first use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states, which is an important principle in Treaties establishing NWFZs, is an essential guarantee for the global non-proliferation regime. We note the recent conclusion of the US 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, committing not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapons states that are party to the NPT and in compliance with their nuclear nonproliferation obligations, as a positive step.
We fully support greater coordination among the various nuclear-weapon-free-zones and Mongolia as a nuclear-weapon-free state to advance the goal of a nuclear-free-world. In this regard, we welcome the outcome document of the 2nd Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zones and Mongolia, held in New York on 30 April 2010.
4. Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy
Thailand believes that there is an ever increasing need for nuclear energy to be put to peaceful uses, given the global energy and environmental crisis. Reliance on nuclear power is expected to grow significantly in the future, particularly in developing countries. There, nuclear technology will be needed for power generation, healthcare, industry, and agriculture, among others.
Fundamental to these developments is the recognition under Article IV of States Parties' inalienable right to develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the Treaty.
We must reinvigorate the role of the IAEA in promoting and facilitating the legitimate development of nuclear energy as well as technology transfer among States Parties. The IAEA's technical cooperation programmes should be strengthened, especially those relating to nuclear science and technology in food safety, medical treatment, agriculture, industrial production.
It is our belief that in order to secure the global supply network for nuclear fuel and guarantee long-term energy security, the issue of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should be addressed within the framework of IAEA taking into account the views of member states.
Mr. President,
As a State Party to the NPT, Thailand reiterates its commitment and obligations under the Treaty and will continue to work towards achieving its goals.
Thailand fully supports the ongoing efforts to strengthen the NPT review process. My delegation looks forward to working closely with you and other delegations in making this conference a success.
Thank you, Mr. President.










Mr. President,


Mr. President,




Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



