
PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
5 Rue Gustave-Moynier, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland
TEL (22) 715-1010 • FAX (22) 715-1000
Statement
by
H.E. Mr. Thani Thongphakdi
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Thailand to the
United Nations Office and other International Organizations in
Geneva
General Debate
of the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
23 April 2013, Palais des Nations, Geneva
Please check against delivery 
- 2 -
Mr. Chairman,
1. On behalf of the Thai Delegation, I wish to congratulate you
upon your election as Chair of the Second Session of the Preparatory
Committee of the 2015 NPT Review Conference. Given your able
leadership and under your wise guidance, I am confident that this
meeting will be concluded successfully and will contribute positively
towards the 2015 Review Conference. Towards this end, please rest
assured of Thailand’s full support.
2. Thailand also wishes to associate itself with the statement made
by the distinguished delegate of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) States Parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
3. It has been more than four decades since the Treaty on the NonProliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) entered into force. Over the
years, the NPT has proven to be the only regime which addresses the
three equally important issues of nuclear disarmament, nuclear nonproliferation
and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The adoption of the
Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference by consensus
not only represents a successful negotiation, but also reflects the
strong political will of all NPT States Parties to achieve concrete
results which includes the 64-point action plan. Building on the
achievement of the First Session of the Preparatory Committee last
year, it is incumbent upon us to make tangible progress towards the
goal of nuclear disarmament over the next two weeks.
4. Towards that end, Thailand firmly believes that nuclear
disarmament and nonproliferation must be treated as substantively
interrelated and mutually reinforcing. These two intertwined
challenges require strong political will and practical undertakings
from both nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states. It is
also important to stress the universality of the NPT – a crucial aspect
that will promote progress towards achieving the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. 
- 3 -
Mr. Chairman,
5. The vision of a world free of nuclear weapons will never be
realized if the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against any
non–nuclear–weapon state persists. Thailand therefore calls for the
early conclusion of a universal and legally binding agreement on
negative security assurances. In this regard, Thailand welcomes the
convening of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
Nuclear Disarmament, to be held on 26 September 2013 which will
provide us with a timely opportunity to further our on-going dialogue
on a range of methods and topics to accelerate multilateral action
towards the said vision. We also welcome the result of the Conference
on Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in Oslo in March this
year which further illustrated the devastating effect of the use of
nuclear weapons on human life as well as the environment. We hope
that such abhorrent scenarios have rendered any contemplation to
engage nuclears arsenal as irresponsible, reprehensible and
unthinkable.
6. More broadly, Thailand hopes that the fresh initiatives
introduced at the UN General Assembly last year will revitalize the
Conference on Disarmament and looks forward to the commencement
of negotiations on a treaty banning the production of fissile material,
as well as a Nuclear Weapon Convention, which should be held in an
inclusive manner.
Mr. Chairman,
7. To achieve practical outcome in all three pillars of the NPT,
global efforts must be further enhanced by regional efforts. As an
active proponent of the Bangkok Treaty, which established the South
East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ), Thailand
supports the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different
regions. We are therefore disappointed that the Conference to
establish the NWFZ in the Middle East has been postponed. Thailand
urges all parties to fully support the convening of the conference at 
- 4 -
the earliest opportunity to avoid any negative repercussions on the
relevance and credibility of the NPT.
8. Cooperation amongst different NWFZs, as well as agreements
between NWFZs and nuclear-weapon States, will enhance the
effectiveness of the agreements in serving as confidence-building
measures at the regional and global levels. As a State Party to the
SEANWFZ Treaty, Thailand welcomes progress made by the States
Parties and the nuclear-weapon States towards the signing of the
Protocol to the Treaty.
9. Thailand has also been active in promoting activities that
complement the implementation of the NPT. Among other things,
Thailand has participated actively in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT), Nuclear Security Summit and just
became part of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). Moreover,
Thailand in cooperation with the United States, will host an ASEAN
Regional Forum Workshop on Implementation of UNSCR 1540 in
Bangkok, from 14-15 May 2013. The aim of this workshop is to assist
ARF Member States to establish effective domestic controls to
prevent trafficking of weapons of mass destruction, thereby
contributing towards the global nuclear security framework.
Mr. Chairman,
10. It is the inalienable right of States Parties to develop and use
nuclear energy in a safe, secure and peaceful manner, in accordance
with the obligations under Article IV as well as other relevant
provisions of the NPT. However, we believe that such rights must
come with responsibilities. Thailand attaches great importance to
nuclear safety, security and safeguards at the national, regional and
international levels. At the regional level, in particular, we have
proposed the idea of establishing a network amongst nuclear
regulatory bodies within the Southeast Asian region to provide a
framework for the issues of safety, security and safeguards, based on
IAEA standards and practices.
 
- 5 -
11. In closing, Mr. Chairman, Thailand remains hopeful that, despite
the many challenges ahead, we will be able to achieve substantive
progress over the next fortnight. My delegation looks forward to
working closely with you and other delegations to achieve this goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
* * * * * * * * * 