I join others in congratulating you on your Presidency of the 2010 NPT Review Conference and extending our full support and cooperation in the performance of your duties.
Turkey, like many others, regards the NPT as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. As a country that is party to all major international non-proliferation instruments and regimes, Turkey remains committed to the full implementation, further strengthening and universalization of the Treaty with all its three pillars - namely, non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful use of nuclear energy. The "grand bargain" on which the NPT regime is founded, rests upon these three inseparable and mutually reinforcing pillars. In this context, the importance of equal and balanced treatment of these three pillars cannot be overemphasized.
Mr. President,
The inconclusive outcome of the 2005 Review Conference was a stark manifestation of the challenges facing the NPT regime. We can counter these challenges by reaffirming and reinforcing our prior commitments. Indeed, past achievements, such as those of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences, including the Thirteen Practical Steps of 2000, are testimonies to our ability to reach unanimity during rather tough and testing times.
Backtracking from these commitments would erode the credibility of the Treaty. It is therefore all the more important that we demonstrate the necessary political will to reaffirm and reinforce our legal and political commitments stemming from the NPT and its Review Conferences.
As far as nuclear disarmament is concerned, we believe that all treaty-based nuclear arms control and disarmament accords play their distinctive roles in meeting the Article VI obligations within the NPT. We commend the steps already taken by the NPT nuclear power States towards further reductions and transparency and hope that this momentum will be preserved. In this context, Turkey welcomes the new Strategic Offensive Arms Reduction Treaty (START) signed between the United States and the Russian Federation on 8 April 2010. We welcome the renewed commitment of the permanent members of the Security Council to the principles of nuclear non-proliferation regime and the vision of a nuclear weapons free world.
We will continue to encourage further positive steps to be taken by all nuclear-weapon states aimed at enhancing global security. Turkey attaches particular importance to the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in these efforts.
Turkey also continues to support the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). In this regard, we are encouraged by the announcement of Indonesia on its initiation of ratification process of the Treaty. We call on all States that have not yet signed or ratified the Treaty to do so as soon as possible - in particular those states whose ratification is required for its entry into force. Pending that, States should continue to abide by a moratorium and refrain from any acts contrary to the provisions of the CTBT. Likewise, we support the commencement of negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT) within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament. This could pave the way to parallel advances in related fields, including further progress on nuclear weapon free zones, negative security assurances and prevention of arms race in outer space.
We acknowledge the international safeguards system of the IAEA as the fundamental tool in global non-proliferation efforts. We also uphold the status of the Agency as the sole legitimate body to determine compliance within this system. In this context, Turkey recognizes the need for further strengthening and universalization of the Agency's verification authority as well as its work in the area of promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We regard the comprehensive safeguards and the Additional Protocol of the IAEA as the indispensable verification standard. We call on all States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify and implement the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, as well as the IAEA Additional Protocol as soon as possible.
From a wider perspective, we believe that the NPT and other international legal instruments against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are complementary. Taking this opportunity, I would like to reiterate Turkey's unwavering support for the efforts aimed at preventing the proliferation of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction. In this vein, we highly value the establishment of zones free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, wherever practically feasible. In particular, we support the establishment of an effectively verifiable zone free of such weapons and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We encourage all efforts for developing a common regional understanding on this project, with the participation of all parties concerned.
It is our sincere hope that NPT States Parties will seize the opportunity provided by this Conference to renew and to further their prior commitments towards a nuclear weapon-free Middle East.
Mr. President,
We believe that the NPT States Parties are condoned with the right to withdraw from the NPT under conditions stipulated by the Treaty. Having said that, we also think that for countries which would choose to leave the Treaty while found in non-compliance with their Treaty obligations by the IAEA, we should work on some certain procedures and consequences in connection with exercising this right of withdrawal.
Mr. President,
The risk of acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery by terrorists and other non-state actors should not be underestimated either. We need to remain vigilant and cooperate to avoid possible attacks involving nuclear and radiological materials. In this regard, the first and foremost step toward eliminating the risk of nuclear terrorism is to further the nuclear disarmament efforts and to decrease the role of nuclear weapons in national security policies. I hereby would like to note the balanced and carefully crafted outcome of the 2010 Nuclear Security Summit held last month which demonstrated the common determination in the field of nuclear security. The international community needs to redouble its efforts aimed at effective and universal implementation of all legal means available, including UNSC resolutions 1540 and 1887 and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We also deem valuable the contributions made by other multilateral arrangements such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee.
Turkey is fully supportive of the greatest possible enjoyment of the benefits of nuclear energy for NPT States that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. At the same time, we believe that all necessary steps need to be taken in order to ensure that there will be no increased risk of proliferation associated with the expansion of nuclear energy.
We believe that the role of IAEA is essential in assisting developing States parties in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Turkey has been closely following the developments to establish a new multilateral framework for assurance of nuclear fuel supply. Provision of nuclear fuel in a predictable, stable and cost effective manner over the long term without undue interference and ownership of these mechanisms through a general sense of agreement on their modalities by the wider membership of the IAEA are essential for a broader basis for their implementation.
Mr. President,
The integrity and credibility of the NPT require the renewed commitment of all of us to its principles and objectives. We will continue to work actively and constructively with a view to reaching a substantive and balanced outcome at the Review Conference.
I thank you.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



