Check against delivery
1
NPT 1st PREPATORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL STATEMENT OF TURKEY
2 MAY 2017
Mr Chairman,
I congratulate you on your assumption of the chairmanship of the first session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference. I assure you of our support
and cooperation in discharging your duties.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered by the distinguished Permanent
Representative of Germany on behalf of the NPDI, and also the general statement of the EU.
Turkey regards the NPT as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and the
essential foundation of the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. As a country that is party to all
major international non-proliferation instruments and regimes, Turkey remains committed to
the full implementation and further strengthening of the Treaty with its three pillars namely
non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful use of nuclear energy.
At the start of a new review cycle, our priority is to uphold NPT as a major instrument for
reinforcing international peace, security and stability and to promote its universalization.
The 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the 2010 Action Plan identified the main
goals in the three pillars. All States Parties have an obligation to deliver in terms of the Action
Plan.
Mr Chairman,
Turkey supports systematic, progressive, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament and
encourages all states that possess nuclear weapons to take further steps in this direction. The
primary responsibility rests with the Nuclear Weapon States. The world has been waiting for
substantial reductions and limitations since the entry into force of the New START in 2011.
Regarding the states outside the NPT regime, we would like to reiterate our call to accede to
the Treaty without conditions as non-nuclear-weapon States.
We remain committed to a world without nuclear weapons. In our opinion this can not be
achieved without taking legitimate security interests into consideration. Our approach is
focused on incremental steps that deliver concrete results contributing to disarmament. Last
years have witnessed sharpened differences of opinion and an unproductive polarization. On
our part, we will continue working towards the implementation of the 2010 NPT Action
Plan. Sanctity of the NPT and current NPT Review Cycle should not be undermined by
efforts undertaken elsewhere.
Mr Chairman, 
Check against delivery
2
The cessation of all nuclear weapon tests constitutes an important step towards both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, I would like to stress the centrality of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). We call upon all States to uphold and maintain
moratoria on nuclear weapon test explosions and any other nuclear explosions. Despite all the
progress achieved at the political and technical levels, we regret the fact that twenty years
after its opening for signature, it has yet to enter into force.
We once again encourage all States, in particular to the remaining Annex II States whose
ratifications are required for the entry into force of the Treaty, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible.
Another essential step will be the commencement of negotiations on a non-discriminatory,
multilateral and verifiable treaty to ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices at the Conference of Disarmament (CD). This will again
serve both disarmament and non-proliferation purposes. In this context, we welcome the
establishment of the High Level Expert Preparatory Group.
Altough the CD could not negotiate a treaty for the past 2 decades, we believe the CD has its
own virtues. It successfully negotiated treaties in the past. The CD needs to be revitalized so
that it can assume substantive work and start negotiating as it has been mandated. We
welcome all efforts to bring the CD back to work. It is Turkey’s firm conviction that the CD
has the mandate, membership and the rules of procedures to discharge its functions.
Turkey also supported the UN General Assembly resolution on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification and welcomes the establishment of the Group of Experts. We deem multilateral
nuclear verification capabilities necessary for realization and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons. It is with this understanding Turkey participates in the International Panel
on Verification of Nuclear Disarmament (IPNDV).
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among States of the regions concerned is an important non-proliferation and disarmament
measure.
A pending critical commitment of the 1995 Review Conference is the convening of an
International Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the
Middle East. This commitment will continue to be a critical element of this review cycle.
Mr Chairman,
On non-proliferation, IAEA Safeguards is a vital component of the global non-proliferation
regime. Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement (CSA) and its Additional Protocol are the
essential tools establishing a solid verification standard.
We call on those states that have not yet done so, to sign, ratify and implement their CSAs
and Additional Protocols without further delay.
Check against delivery
3
Turkey underscores the crucial role of export controls to support the fulfilment of nuclear
non-proliferation obligations of NPT.
Unfortunately, a grave proliferation crisis continues as we speak. Turkey, has condemned the
nuclear tests and missile launches carried out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK) in violation of UN Security Council Resolutions. We once again urge the DPRK
comply with its international obligations in full. We call upon the DPRK to return to the NPT
at an early date and IAEA Safeguards, to ratify CTBT and to refrain from increasing existing
regional tensions.
The agreement on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is an important achievement for
peace and stability not only for the region but also globally. It testifies to the continued
relevance of the NPT. Full and transparent implementation of the JCPOA will strengthen the
non-proliferation regime. Turkey acknowledges and supports the key role of the IAEA in the
implementation of the JCPOA.
The risk of acquisition of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their delivery means by
terrorists and other non-state actors should not be underestimated. We need to remain vigilant
and cooperate to avoid possible attacks involving nuclear and radiological materials. UN
Security Council Resolution 1540, complemented by resolution 2325, remains a key part of
the non-proliferation architecture. Turkey, party to all export control regimes, attaches
greatest importance to them.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey strongly supports the inalienable rights of states to benefit from the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Nuclear safety and security are both responsibilities of the individual state. Keeping a high
level of safety and security with respect to nuclear facilities and material are conducive to
extending the benefits of peaceful nuclear technology globally.
The IAEA, by administering international nuclear safeguards in accordance with the NPT, has
a pivotal role in the non-proliferation regime. It also has a leading role in strengthening the
international nuclear security framework.
Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) is the most direct and tangible service of the
Agency, geared towards introducing and improving the peaceful uses of nuclear technology
worldwide, in conformity with Article IV.
As an embarking country, Turkey has concluded both a CSA and Additional Protocol with the
IAEA. The Broader Conclusion obtained from the Agency in 2012, confirming that all
nuclear materials in Turkey have remained in peaceful activities, proves the high standards
that Turkey’s system of accounting and control of nuclear material has reached.
We welcome the entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM).
Check against delivery
4
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey, together with its partners at the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI), will continue to play a constructive role in bridging positions during the 2020 NPT
Review Cycle. The NPDI has submitted for consideration at this PrepCom, several working
papers on FMCT, CTBT, transparency, disarmament education and peaceful uses.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our sincere wish for the success of this
PrepCom. It provides us an opportunity to start looking for common areas to make progress.
It also provides an opportunity to understand respective positions better. We have had ample
time to take stock of the 2015 Review Conference and draw lessons to learn from it.
We are here to reaffirm the relevance of the NPT and the importance of continued progress
towards achieving its key objectives. This is our common ground. Let us build on it.
Thank you.