CHECIC AGAINST DELIVERY
Statement by Turkey
at the Second PrepCom of the 2015 NPT RevCon
(Geneva, 22 April- 3 May 2013)
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Allow me, at the outset, to add my voice to others who have congratulated you for the
assumption of the Presidency of the Second PrepCom. You can count on Turkey's support
during the discharge of your duties.
Mr. Chairman,
We live in a world where security has become indivisible. We all benefit from a secure
environment and suffer from its absence. Contrary to old thinking, we are living in an era
where one cannot argue that more arms would bring more security. There lies the virtue of
disarmament.
We have common issues, common challenges, sometimes even common threats. We
must collectively strive to address them. Our ability to respond efficiently to the pressing
challenges to international peace and security depends mostly on how we inalce best use of
multilateral fora, including the Review Process of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
With this mindset, Turkey is resolutely committed to the ultimate goal of a world
without nuclear weapons. Our security policies exclude the production and use of all kinds of
weapons of mass destruction. Their proliferation is a matter of serious concern to us. Turkey
is party to aT1 international non-proliferation instruments and export control regimes. We
support their universalization, as well as effective implementation in good faith and
consistency. On T~~rltey's part, we enjoy a strong record in the iinplementation of our nonproliferation
obligations.
Turkey considers the NPT as the cornerstone of global disarmament and nonproliferation
regime. We are fully committed lo the implementation of the Treaty in all its
three mutually reinforcing pillars, ~~arnely disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. We actively contribute to international efforts in these spheres;
As a count~y at the threshold of its own nuclear energy program, Turkey supports the
greatest possible enjoyment of the benefits oE nuclear energy for all States that are in full
compliance with their international obligations. Measures that we collectively take to ensure
nuclear non-proliferation must, in no way, hinder international cooperation on peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and access to nuclear technology, equipment and material for peaceful
purposes. While we remain strongly focused on ensuring the security of nuclear and other 
CFIECK AGAINST DELIVERY
,'
radioactive materials globally, we need to equally ensure the continued benefits that these
materials and their related applications offer. This is crucial for countries like Turkey, which
need to integrate nuclear power into their energy supply mix in order to meet the growing
domestic demand.
Mr. Ct~air~nan,
Following the successful conclusion of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, a positive
atmosphere prevailed. We had a comprehensive Action Plan at hand. Besides, the entry into
force and ongoing implementation of the new START and commitment to and progress
achieved in securing nuclear and other radioactive materials through the Nuclear Security
Summit process have given us hope for further achievements in the future.
Unfortunately, 2013 is already proving to be a difficult year in the areas of
disarmament a~d non-proliferation. We are going through important regional and global
challenges. On a more global level, it is a truism that nuclear weapons exist in gruesome
numbers and there i$ a looming risk of proliferation. The important test of striking a balance
between disarmament and non-proliferation stands before us.
To be able to cope with the current challenges, Turlcey believes that the existing
mechanism needs to be strengthened and where necessary, effectively revitalized.
We can unfortunately not talk about a significant progress vis-8-vis 2010 Action Plan.
There are shortcomings in the field of transparency. To this end, we wish to call upon the
Nuclear Weapon States of the Treaty to expedite their steps aiming to bring about tangible
results. An overall reduction of the global stockpiles of nuclear weapons, in accordance with
Article VI, in a transparent, irreversible and verifiable manner and the elimination of these
weapons from military doctrines are of lcey importance if we wish to realize the aspiration of
Global Zero.
Another important priority is the establishment of effectively verifiable zones free of
nuclear weapons and other Weapons of Mass Destruction, wherever feasible. We hope to see
all Nuclear Weapon States affiliating themselves with the existing Treaties establishing such
zones.
At this stage, allow me to underscore the disappointment of Turlcey for the
postponement of the 2012 Middle East Conference. It is Turkey's sincere expectation that the
Conference takes place at the earliest convenience, since this initiative can prove to be not
only an important confidence building measure at this critical stage in the Middle East, but
also a significant stimulus to the NPT Review Process. To this end, we call on all relevant
states to undertake a constructive approach and exert genuine efforts for the expeditious
realization of this Conference. Turkey's unwavering support to the Facilitator and his team
will continue.
At the non-proliferation front, possible benchmarks for the sustainability of the NPT in
the longer run include universalization of the Treaty, strengthening of the IAEA safeguards
system, reinforcement of export controls, early entry into force of the CTBT, resumption of
FMCT negotiations without further delay and - last but not least - peaceful settlement of the
cases of non-proliferation concern through dialogue and diplomacy. 
CFIECIC AGAINST DELIVERY
The longstanding stalemate at the Conference on Disarmament (CD) unfortunately
remains. Turlcey wishes to see the immediate resumption of substantive work at the
Conference. There is an urgent need to come up with a consensual Program of Work. Such a
development will not only pave the way towards the commencement of negotiations on an
FMCT, but also facilitate parallel advances on other agenda items.
Proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery means becomes all the
more worrying in the context of terrorism. The international community needs to remain
vigilant about the risk of acquisition by terrorists of these weapons and their delivery
vehicles.
Last but not the least, we remain concerned by the risk that nuclear weapons pose for
humanity. The participants of the recent Oslo Conference have been further acquainted with
the horrific consequences of a nuclear use or accidental detonation. Turlcey believes that a
robust awareness should be raised at the international level so that future generations do not
have to fear for the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons. Turlcey
welcomed the discussions at the Oslo Conference and look forward to actively participating to
the follow-up.
Mr. Chairman,
There are challenges, but we need to strive to transform these challenges into
opportunities. We hope that the second half of 2013 turns out to be a year of progress. For a
better future, nations should rely on the reconciling effects of cooperation and dialogue
among themselves. Global peace and security can only be achieved through common vision
and interdependence, not the so-called "nuclear deterrence". Turlcey is prepared to work
together wlth other States Parties in this fo~mi and elsewhere towards the achievement of this
vision.
Thank you. 
