UAE StatementNPT
PrepCorn 2013 - General Debate
*Check upon delivery
Mr Chairman,
I would like at the outset to congratulate you on your appointment I
!
as the chair of the second preparatory committee for the NPT
2015 review conference. I am confident that your leadership and I
I
I
I
diplomatic sltills will facilitate a positive outcome of this meeting. I !
assure you the full support of my delegation. i
I
I would like to associate my delegation with the statement read on I
I
behalf of NAM, the statement read on behalf of the Arab Group,
l
and the statement read on behalf of NPDI countries ....
Additionally I would like to provide the following statement: 
Mr Chairman,
The UAE has always been and will always be committed to
ensuring global security. This was demonstrated by the UAE's
decision to join the NPT in 1995. Following this was the
ratification of thk Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in
2000 and the conclusion of the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement in 2003 and bringing in force the Additional Protocol
UAE has adopted a detailed policy on the development of a
peaceful nuclear energy programme in 2008, endorsed important
principles of complete transparency, the commitment to the
highest standards of safety, security, non-proliferation and full
cooperation with the IAEA as fundamental principles by which all
nuclear activities and programmes should be governed. 
2010 NPT review conference was a positive one in the sense that
we all agreed ton the way forward on how to maintain and
strengthen the implementation of the treaty. The NPT framework
is crucial and fundamental part of not only the non-proliferation
regime but general global security and hence we all should spare
no efforts in ensuring the full implementation and
universalization of the treaty.
However, there are some serious challenges to the NPT regime
today. Generally, these are the lack of concrete'steps toward
disarmament; the existence of states outside the treaty; issues of
noncompliance; and continued nuclear pro1 1 iferation threats.
These challenges call for measures to strengthen the treaty and
hence the PrepCom and review process should focus on these
challenges. 
On the non-proliferation front, the NPT regime and the IAEA
safeguards system continue to be challenged. We support the
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a right of every
state party to the treaty. Yet this right comes with substantial
responsibilities. In order to provide the needed confidence and
mutual trust of in the exclusive peaceful nature of nuclear
programmes, states that are developing nuclear energy for
peaceful uses should fully Adhere to comprehensive safeguards
measures; Fully cooperate with the IAEA; Take required steps to
fully address all international concerns and obligations including
those of relevant IAEA and UNSC resolutions. Further more,
Implementation of the Additional Protocol will facilitate the full
support and confidence of the international community and
important to maintain the credibility of IAEA safeguards system. 
The IAEA has a central and crucial role to play in assisting
countries to develop nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner.
Hence the IAEA role and mandate should be strengthened in this
area. The IAEA role in the area of multilateral solutions in the area
of nuclear energy is an important role. The UAE highly values the
establishment of the IAEA fuel bank, and encourages further steps
to establish multilateral mechanisms to ensure provisions of fuel
supply and services including the front end and the back end of
the fuel cycle.
Mr Chairman
When it comes to verification, my delegation would like to
emphasize the importance of the CTBT's entry into force. The
CTBT is an important tool for building mutual trust and
confidence, which is needed to reduce the threat posed by nuclear
weapons. UAE is actively promoting its entry-into-force and
5 
implementation of the CTBT at the national, regional and global
levels through our diplomatic efforts. The UAE has condemned the
recent nuclear tests by the DPRK as another provocative step that
endangers the NPT regime , The nuclear tests highlight the
importance of the CTBT and call for a swift response and
diplomatic efforts to bring in force the CTBT.
The NPT has recognized the relationship between nuclear nonproliferation
and nuclear disarmqment. Implementing measures
agreed upon in the area of disarmament will strengthen nonproliferation
efforts and the NPT frameworlc in general Moreover,
the UAE shares the view that the only way to ensure the non-use
or non-threat to use nuclear weapons is the total elimination of
those weapons.
UAE supports the international efforts in addressing the
humanitarian aspects of using nuclear weapons with an objective,
6 
in the long run, to ban the use, threat and eventually owning these
weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
The establishment the nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle
East is a long due and important step for the NPT regime. UAE
deeply regrets that 2012 conference on the establishment of such
a zone did not take place , and call on the Convenors to take up
'their responsibilities in holding the conference soon and without
further delay. Successful progress on the establishment of a
nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East will demonstrate
the effectiveness of the treaty to achieve its objectives. We thank
the Facilitator ,H.E Ambassador laajava for his efforts and
encourage him to continue his endeavour to convene the
conference as soon as possible. 
Mr. Chairman,
UAE continues to take further tangible steps to support the
implementation of the action plan adopted in 2010 NPT. review
conference. The NPT review process comes with a lot of
challenges, bu't given the importance of the NPT framework in
ensuring global peace and security , the UAE hopes that all
delegations will work together constructively to achieve a positive
progress. 