UAE Statement
NPT PrepCom 2012 -. Vienna
Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad Al Kaabi
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the IAEA
* Check against delivery
Mr. Chairman,
I would like at the outset to congratulate you on your appointment as the chair of the
first preparatory committee for the NPT 2015 review conference. I am confident that
your leadership and diplomatic skills will facilitate a positive outcome of this meeting.
I assure you the full support of my delegation.
I would like to associate my delegation with the statements read on behalf of NPDl
countries, the statement read on behalf of NAM, and the statement read on behalf
of the Arab group . Additionally I would like to provide the following statement:
Mr chairman,
The UAE has always been committed to ensuring global security and the reduction of
threats posed by nuclear weapons. This was demonstrated by the UAE's decision to
join the NPT in 1995. Following this was the ratification of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 2000 and the conclusion of the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement in 2003 and bringing in force the Additional Protocol in 2010.
The United Arab Emirates, has adopted a detailed policy on the development of a
peaceful nuclear energy programme, which highlighted the UAE's commitments
related to the use of nuclear energy. The policy endorsed principles of complete
transparency, the commitment to the highest standards of safety, security, nonproliferation
and full cooperation with the IAEA as fundamental principles by which
all nuclear activities and programmes should be governed. 
UAE views the NPT framework as a crucial and fundamental part of not only the
non-proliferation regime but general global security. Additionally, it is a crucial
framework to facilitate the right to develop peaceful nuclear technology in a
responsible manner.
However, despite the positive outcome of this important treaty, there are some
serious challenges to the NPT regime today. Generally, these are the lack of concrete
steps toward disarmament; the existence of states outside the treaty; issues of noncompliance;
and continued nuclear proliferation threats.
These challenges call for measures to strengthen the treaty and hence the prepcom
and review process should focus on these challenges.
On the non-proliferation challenges, and due to unique circumstances surrounding
the use of nuclear material, the NPT grants rights and obligations for every member
of the treaty. We support the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a
right of every state party to the treaty. Yet this right comes with substantial
responsibilities.
States that are developing nuclear energy for peaceful uses should adhere to
comprehensive safeguards measures; fully cooperate with the IAEA; and take
required steps to fully address all international concerns and obligations including
those of relevant IAEA and UNSC resolutions. Full compliance with safeguards
obligations are absolutely crucial.
Additionally, the added confidence provided by safeguards when reinforced by an
Additional Protocol, will facilitate the full support and confidence of the international
community and at the same time ensures the credibility of IAEA safeguards system
Similarly , States with nuclear experience should facilitate and assist non-nuclear
states in developing peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Assistance can be in form of
provision of technical expertise as well as to facilitate the transfer of peaceful nuclear
technology and materials to developing countries ; including developing more
practical arrangements to export of such materials and technology.
The IAEA has a central and crucial role to play in assisting countries to develop
nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner, and hence the IAEA role and mandate
should be strengthened in this area. UAE welcomes the establishment of the IAEA
fuel bank , and encourages further steps to establish multilateral mechanisms to
ensure provisions of fuel supply and services including the front end and the back
end of the fuel cycle. 
Mr Chairman
Today, the UAE government is taking further tangible steps to support the
implementation of the action plan adopted in 2010 NPT review conference. These
steps include the development of an innovative model for adopting peaceful nuclear
energy to meet the growing domestic energy demand while maintaining the
commitments to highest standards of safety, security and non proliferation.
Additionally, UAE along with 9 other countries established the Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative -the NPDI , aimed at facilitating the implementation of the
action plan agreed in 2010 . The NPDI group has made many contributions already
for this purpose , including multiple working papers submitted to this preparatory
committee meeting.
When it comes to verification, my delegation would like to emphasize the importance
of the CTBT's entry into force. The CTBT is an important tool for building mutual trust
and confidence, which is needed to reduce the threat posed by nuclear weapons.
UAE is also actively promoting its entry-into-force and implementation at the
national, regional and global levels through our diplomatic efforts.
The NPT has recognized the relationship between nuclear non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament. Implementing measures agreed upon in the area of
disarmament will strengthen non-proliferation efforts and the NPT framework in
general Moreover, the UAE shares the view that the only way to ensure the non-use
or non-threat to use nuclear weapons is the total elimination of those weapons.
The establishment the nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East is a long due
and important step for the NPT regime. Accordingly, the UAE appreciates the efforts
being made to convene the 2012 conference on the establishment of such a zone.
Progress on the establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the middle east
and the success of 2012 conference will demonstrate the effectiveness of the treaty
to achieve its objectives.
The review process comes with a lot of challenges, but given the importance of the
NPT framework in ensuring global peace and security , the UAE hopes that the
delegations will work together constructively to achieve a positive progress. 