Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Statement
Rossette Nyirinkindi Katungye
Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative
Permanent Mission of the Republic o
To the United Nations Office in
Geneva, 22 April to 3 May 2013
Please Check Aqainst Delive~y 
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset I wish to congratulate you and members of the bureau upon your
election to guide the work of this Preparatory Committee. You can count on
Uganda's hll support and cooperation.
Mr. Chairman.
The indefinite extension of the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear
weapons (NPT) in 1995 signified the international community's resolve to advance
the three primary goals of the NPT relating to nuclear disarmament, nuclear
nonproliferation, and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The NPT remains the
cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. We reiterate the need to
ensure implementation of all NPT pillars in a balanced and non-discriminatory way
and to work towards the universality of the Treaty. The outcome of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference reaffirmed the shared commitment of States Parties to
preserving the integrity and importance of the Treaty.
My delegation welcomes the outcome of the 1st Session of the PrepCom for the
2015 NPT Review Conference which provided an opportunity for assessing the
implementation of the Treaty. This second session of the Preparatory Committee
gives us yet another opportunity to take stock of the progress made in
implementing the NPT, identify the gaps and challenges, and devise more effective
strategies, drawing on national, regional and international experiences. It is our
conviction that the Prepcoms for the 2015 NPT Review Conference will enlighten
the overall strategy for the full implementation of the action plans adopted at the
20 10 NPT Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
We underscore the importance of full compliaince by all States with their nuclear
disarmament and non proliferation obligations and their undertaking to work
towards general and complete disarmament. 
Uganda supports efforts aimed at establishing nuclear weapon free-zones. In t11is
regard we welcome and commend the nuclear weapon free-zones in Latin America
and the Caribbean, South Pacific, Southeast Asia, Africa and Mongolia as critical
developments towards a nuclear free world. We encourage more regions to
emulate these positive developments.
We welcome the conclusion and entry-into-force of the New Strategic Anns
Reduction Treaty (START) between the United States and Russian Federation. We
also welcome the Nuclear Weapons States follow-up meetings to the NPT
Review Conference as well as initiatives of EU Non-nuclear Weapons States
aimed at promoting the implementation of the 2010 NPT Review Conference final
outcome. We urge nuclear-weapon States to fulfill in good faith the obligations
under article VI of the NPT
Mr. Chairman,
It is widely recognised that, availability of reliable, cost-effective and
environmentally friendly energy is a critical factor for industrialization and
economic development. Many developing countries including Uganda face severe
energy deficits. We therefore underscore the importance of developing further
international cooperation in promoting the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. It is paramount that non-nuclear states are supported to develop and
utilize nuclear energy, while taking into account safety considerations, for a wide
range of peaceful uses including in Medicine, Agriculture, water management and
research.
We acnowledge the indispensable role of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in verifying States' compliance with their nuclear nonproliferation
obligations. To that end, achieving universal conclusion of safeguards
agreements and additional protocols in order to strengthen the IAEA verification
regime is essential. Uganda has put in place ai institutional framework to facilitate
the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. III October 2008, the Atomic
Energy Law was enacted and an Atomic Energy Council is now operational. We 
call for enhanced support and capacity building for the developing countries in the
field of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
We reiterate our support for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) goals and
objectives aimed at banning all nuclear explosions in all environments, for military
or civilian intentions. The importance of achieving universal adherence to tlie
CTBT, bearing in mind the special responsibilities of Nuclear Weapon States,
cannot be overemphasized.
My delegation expresses great concern at the growing risk of linkages between
terrorism, nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction. The danger of
nuclear terrorism is real; it is one of the grave threats to our global security. The
risk of nuclear attacks has increased considerably over the years, because
radioactive and nuclear materials that can be acquired though illicit means and
the capacity to be used in the construction of nuclear weapons exist in many
countries. It is therefore essential to ensure improved accounting, control and
physical protection systems for nuclear and other radioactive materials and
substances. Jil this regard we welcome the role of the IAEA in monitoring and
inspecting nuclear facilities and urge concerned countries to ensure full
observance of IAEA safeguards at all times.
Mr. Chairman,
In Conclusion, as a State Party to the NPT, Uganda reiterates its support for the
NPT as tlie cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation system, the critical
foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament in accordance with its Article VI
and a significant element to enhance development of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. The proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction poses a serious threat to the world today more tl~an ever before. The
current security threats and proliferation risks signify the urgency and need for
adequate implementation of the NPT. The 2010 NPT Review Conference 
consensus outcome should be a common road map to the 2015 Review
Conference.
I thank you 