1
Check against delivery
2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons: New York, 27 April – 22 May 2015
General Debate
Statement by the United Kingdom
Madam President,
I congratulate you on your appointment. My delegation will of
course support your efforts to ensure a successful outcome to this
Review Conference.
Madam President, the United Kingdom remains committed to the
Non Proliferation Treaty. It has played an unparalleled role, keeping
the world safe and curtailing the nuclear arms race. It is at the
centre of international efforts to stop the spread of nuclear
weapons, to create a nuclear weapon free world, and to enable
access to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We look to this Review Conference to build on the success of the
2010 Action Plan and strengthen the Treaty further. The United
Kingdom has made progress since 2010, as set out in our revised
National Report. We remain committed to the full implementation of
the Action Plan, even if some actions will take longer to implement
than others. We expect the RevCon to confirm its continuing
salience.
Madam President, the United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
step-by-step disarmament, and our obligations under Article Six.
We announced in January that we have reduced the number of
warheads on each of our deployed ballistic missile submarines from
48 to 40, and the number of operational missiles on each of those
submarines to no more than eight. 
2
Check against delivery
This takes our total number of operationally available warheads to
no more than 120. This will enable us to reduce our overall nuclear
warhead stockpile to not more than 180 by the mid 2020s.
My Government acknowledges that, despite significant reductions
in global warhead numbers after the Cold War, there is frustration at
the perceived slow pace of global disarmament. In recent years,
this has been most evident at a number of international conferences
on the humanitarian impact of the use of nuclear weapons.
The UK attended the Vienna Conference because we recognise the
importance that many attach to this initiative. Many attendees
argued, with great force, that devastating humanitarian
consequences could result from the use of nuclear weapons.
The United Kingdom agrees. But this concern is not new. It is
enshrined in the NPT itself, and has framed, and continues to
frame, our approach to non-proliferation and disarmament. Our
deterrence doctrine – and the robust safety and security measures
we have put in place – were developed in the full knowledge of
those potential consequences.
3
Check against delivery
Some would like to force the speed of disarmament without taking
into account wider security considerations. This risks jeopardising
the achievements of the NPT and undermining its future. Our
unilateral reductions have not always encouraged other states
possessing nuclear weapons to follow our example, nor influenced
those seeking a nuclear weapons capability to abandon their
attempts.
My Government will therefore retain a credible and effective
minimum nuclear deterrent for as long as the global security
situation makes that necessary.
But let me be clear: the UK is here to negotiate in good faith, and
we will continue to strive to build the conditions for a world without
nuclear weapons.
This is why we are making parallel progress on the building blocks
for global nuclear disarmament.
We have continued, and will continue, our ground-breaking
verification work with Norway and with the United States.
We have signed, and ratified, a Protocol to the Central Asia Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone Treaty.
We hosted the sixth P5 Conference in London in February, taking
further steps on transparency. Only by talking openly and frankly
can we create the right conditions for more rapid nuclear
disarmament. We will look to build on such initiatives. 
4
Check against delivery
Madam President, responding resolutely to proliferation is a key
challenge for all States. It is central to the effective functioning of
the NPT. We will continue to support the International Atomic
Energy Agency, and the strengthening of measures to give us all
confidence that states are in compliance with their NPT obligations.
On 2 April the United Kingdom, as a member of the E3+3, agreed
with Iran the key parameters of a comprehensive deal on their
nuclear programme. This was a major milestone towards reassuring
the international community that Iran’s programme is exclusively
peaceful.
Important political and technical issues still need to be worked
through, but we will aim to finalise all of the detail within these
agreed parameters by the end of June.
We welcome Iran’s adherence to its nuclear-related commitments
under the Joint Plan of Action and give our full support to the IAEA
in verifying them. We continue to urge Iran to cooperate fully with
the IAEA to resolve all outstanding issues, including in relation to
possible military dimensions.
The United Kingdom deplores the DPRK’s ongoing nuclear
activities and its threats of a fourth nuclear test. We continue to be
concerned about Syria’s failure to remedy its non-compliance with
the NPT.
The United Kingdom supports the 1995 Resolution on the Middle
East and the goal of a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass
destruction. 
5
Check against delivery
We deeply regret that a Conference on the establishment of such a
zone has not yet taken place. We worked tirelessly with the
Facilitator and other Co-convenors to encourage regional states to
agree Conference arrangements, and welcome the significant
efforts of all states that participated in a series of informal
consultations. We hope that the remaining differences can be
bridged soon.
Madam President, while we recognise the right of any State to
withdraw from the NPT in line with Article Ten, we hope that this
RevCon will agree a set of principles to prevent the abuse of this
right.
We also reaffirm the inalienable right of all States Parties to access
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, provided that they are in
compliance with their obligations. We stand ready to assist states in
the development of safe and secure civil nuclear energy.
Madam President, reaching agreement at this RevCon will be
challenging. But at a time of growing international uncertainty, we
must remember that the NPT has stood us in good stead, and that it
must continue to do so.
The United Kingdom will therefore play its part to reach an outcome
that best benefits our collective rights to undiminished security,
whilst taking us closer to our goal of a world free from nuclear
weapons.
END