THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND
GENERAL STATEMENT
to the
THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS
By
Peter Jones
Director Defence and International Security
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
New York, 28 April 2014
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
Mr. Chairman,
1. I congratulate you on your appointment. My delegation will do all we can to support
your efforts to ensure a successful outcome to this PrepCom and set us on a
positive track to the RevCon in 12 months' time.
2. The United Kingdom fully supports the statement made on behalf of the European
Union. I would now like to add some further remarks in a national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
3. As we approach the end of this Review Cycle, we must continue to remind ourselves
of our success in agreeing a cross-pillar Action Plan in 2010. This was a significant
achievement. All States Parties are bound by that Action Plan, and my Government
hopes that all will consider how to report on their own progress against it ahead of
the RevCon. But we must recognise that the Action Plan was not a time-limited fiveyear
exercise, and that we will need to agree the most appropriate way to make
further progress on all of its issues.
4. The UK has been working diligently to make progress on the actions identified in the
2010 Action Plan, including Action 5. In 2010 we undertook to share the results of
our efforts at this PrepCom, and we are pleased to be able to circulate a report with
that information in the coming days.
5. The report follows a standard form agreed by the five NPT Nuclear Weapon States.
That this has been achieved for the first time demonstrates the value of the P5
process and the incremental increases in trust and transparency between us that
help create the conditions for disarmament. We recognise that there is much more
work to be done, particularly at a time when Russia's actions in Ukraine risk
undermining trust.
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
6. We are nevertheless delighted that, along with the other Nuclear Weapon States,
the United Kingdom will again demonstrate our commitment to legally-binding
negative security assurances by signing a Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear
Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia, during this PrepCom. We do so now because
the United Kingdom remains convinced that such assurances are crucial to making
progress on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We hope to be able to take
a similar step soon with respect to its South East Asian equivalent.
7. We welcome the informal consultations that have taken place between states of the
region on arrangements for a Conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems- the first such conversations in almost two decades. We hope that
an inclusive Conference will be convened soon. We also note the tentative progress
that has been made with Iran since the last PrepCom, and hope that significantly
more progress will be made so that the international community can be fully
reassured about Iran's nuclear programme.
8. There has regrettably been less progress on other issues. The United Kingdom
deplores the DPRK's ongoing nuclear activities, and remains concerned about
Syria's failure to remedy its non-compliance with the NPT. We also believe that
State Parties must consider the ramifications of withdrawal from the NPT on
individual and collective security, even whilst we continue to support the right of
every State Party to withdraw. We hope that we will see progress on these and other
issues by the RevCon.
Mr. Chairman,
9. The NPT has made a crucial contribution to international security over the past fortyfive
years. All States Parties must do what they can to ensure that the NPT remains
at the heart of global dialogue on non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, and we will talk more about our own priorities for each of the
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
pillars in our cluster statements. We also recognise that the NPT continues to face
pressures and challenges. None are insuperable.
1 O.lt is therefore right that we debate how best to achieve our common aims. That
debate needs to support and strengthen our collective commitment to the NPT, not
weaken it.
11 . The UK is fully cognizant of the humanitarian consequences that could result from
the use of nuclear weapons. We endeavour to prevent their use, and remain
steadfastly committed to the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. We recognise
that the recent emphasis on the humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear
weapons stems, in part, from frustration with the pace of disarmament. We share
that frustration. But it must be tempered with both realism and pragmatism.
12. We do not, therefore, support movements towards the negotiation of a ban treaty.
Instead, we continue to believe that steps towards a world without nuclear weapons
must be taken within the context of the political conditions that exist and the NPT's
multi-pillared approach. Disarmament cannot be achieved in isolation.
13.1n summary, Mr. Chairman, the NPT continues to make a significant contribution to
the strategic stability that the international community requires. We must uphold and
strengthen the NPT because of, not despite, the complex security challenges that
we all face. It remains the right framework for progress across all three pillars,
including disarmament. And we must not allow our differences and frustrations
preventing us seeing where we agree.
14. My delegation looks forward to substantive discussion, both this year and next, as
we strive to achieve a consensual outcome in 2015 that reaffirms our support for the
NPT. The United Kingdom looks forward to supporting you and playing its part in a
constructive spirit.
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 