THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND
GENERAL STATEMENT
2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Mr Chairman,
The UK fully aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the EU. I
would now like to make some remarks in my national capacity. I must
first point out that the UK will hold a General Election on 8 June.
Candidates in that election have a range of views. The statement I am
about to make sets out the long-standing British government view on the
NPT.
Firstly may I congratulate you on your appointment as Chairman. I can
assure you of the United Kingdom delegation’s full support for your
efforts to achieve a positive start to the 2020 NPT Review process. We
hope the nomination and appointment of the remaining chairs of the
Review process will follow quickly, and see this as a factor that will
facilitate the process in the coming years.
The Non Proliferation Treaty is vitally important for the UK and for the
international community as a whole. The NPT has played an
unparalleled role in curtailing the nuclear arms race and it continues to
play a role in keeping the world safe. It is at the centre of international
efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, to create a nuclear
weapon free world, and to enable access to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy.
We remain committed to strengthening each of the NPT’s mutually
reinforcing pillars –non-proliferation, disarmament, and the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. These are complementary goals and should be
pursued together, systematically and with equal determination across all
three pillars by all states parties. The consensus action plan for the 2010
RevCon was unprecedented and a result of the strengthened review
process adopted in 1995. We support the fullest implementation of all
action plan recommendations and we call on all States Parties to
continue working towards that end.
This Review Cycle provides an opportunity for us to collectively reaffirm
our commitment to the primacy of the NPT as the cornerstone of the
international nuclear non proliferation regime and the essential 
foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and for peaceful uses
of nuclear energy.
The NPT continues to make a significant contribution to the strategic
stability that the international community requires. We must uphold and
strengthen the NPT because of, not despite, the complex security
challenges that we all face. It remains the right framework for progress
across all three, mutually reinforcing, pillars, including disarmament.
As called on in UNSCR 1887, the United Kingdom continues to urge
non-NPT states to ratify the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states. We
continue to work to bring those states closer to the international nonproliferation
mainstream.
The UK has consistently been at the forefront of international efforts to
tackle proliferation. We must work together to ensure that all States
Party fulfil their non-proliferation obligations.
The UK condemns in the strongest possible terms the DPRK’s continued
development of its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes in
direct violation of UNSCRs 1718, 1874, 2087, 2270 and 2321. We urge
the DPRK to refrain from any actions that may violate UNSCRs, posing
a threat to regional peace and stability, and to abandon its existing
nuclear existing programme in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. The DPRK should instead re-engage with the international
community, and take credible, concrete steps to prioritise the well-being
of its own people instead of its illegal programmes.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an important
contribution to the non proliferation regime. The UK remains absolutely
committed to its full and robust implementation, and we welcome the
latest report from the IAEA confirming Iran is in compliance with its
nuclear-related commitments.
The UK supports a universal, strengthened safeguards system and the
evolution of safeguards implementation to a State level concept. As part
of our commitment to the NPT, the UK also supports the principle and 
establishment of Nuclear Weapons Free Zones, in order to strengthen
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and enhance regional and
international security.
We reaffirm our commitment to the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East,
and to the establishment of a zone in the Middle East free of nuclear and
all other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems. We
remain prepared to actively support and facilitate renewed regional
dialogue aimed at bridging the differing views in the region on
arrangements for a conference. We are encouraging the regional states
to consider what practical steps they might take to build confidence and
promote an inclusive, balanced, and results oriented engagement.
The UK has a strong record on disarmament - we have reduced our own
nuclear forces by over half from their Cold War peak in the late 1970s.
Of the recognised nuclear weapons states, we possess only
approximately 1% of the total global stockpile of nuclear weapons. The
United Kingdom remains firmly committed to step-by-step disarmament,
and our obligations under Article Six. We announced in January 2015
that we have reduced the number of warheads on each of our deployed
ballistic missile submarines from 48 to 40, and the number of operational
missiles on each of those submarines to no more than eight. This takes
our total number of operationally available warheads to no more than
120.
This Government remains committed to reducing the UK stockpile of
nuclear weapons to no more than 180 warheads by the mid-2020s as
set out in the 2015 Strategic Defence and Security Review.
Mr Chairman
Productive results on nuclear disarmament can only be achieved
through a consensus-based approach that takes account of the global
security context. Negotiating an international ban on nuclear weapons
will not bring us closer to the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. 
A ban will not improve the international security environment or increase
trust and transparency. Nor will it address the technical and procedural
challenges of nuclear disarmament verification. Pursuing a consensusbased
step-by-step approach to multilateral disarmament through
building necessary mutual trust between states, and through putting into
place the key international architecture to help build the conditions for
further disarmament, offers the most realistic and effective route towards
our shared goal of a world without nuclear weapons. This goal is one of
the fundamental aims of the NPT. Any initiative which sets up an
alternative process risks undermining or weakening the NPT, and
impacting negatively on international peace and security.
Mr Chairman
The UK recognises that global energy demand is increasing. The world
seeks ever more energy, reliably and sustainably, and looks to nuclear
technology to play an increasing role in securing better quality and
duration of life for so many more people. In consequence, the role of the
NPT – to help the world take advantage of what nuclear technologies
have to offer in a safe, secure, safeguarded and sustainable way –
becomes ever more important. The United Kingdom is fully committed to
the NPT and looks to the future as a committed global partner in the field
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr Chairman
As a responsible Nuclear Weapons State the UK is committed to the
long-term goal of a world without nuclear weapons, and we believe that
the NPT offers the right framework to achieve this. We recognise our
obligations under all three of the pillars of the NPT, and will continue to
work with our international partners to tackle proliferation, to make
progress on multilateral disarmament, and to encourage the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
Thank you, Mr Chairman