The proliferation of
nuclear war being unleashedtetween colet ' T ^ the ' rko7a sphere sbou.d be p.Iced
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. Inability of the 2005 NPT Review Conference to reach agreement on substantive Final Document to address the most pressing challenges to the Treaty was regretful. Consequently, the international community should do its best to uphold the authority of the Treaty, enhance confidence in it as it is vital for global peace and security. In this connection special emphasis should be placed on providing universal adherence to the NPT as inalienable component of the joint non-proliferation efforts.
Prevention of nuclear proliferation and the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, inter alia, reduction of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, overall reduction of the global stockpiles of nuclear weapons in accordance with Article VI of the NPT are crucial for global peace and security. In this context, we consider principle of irreversibility in disarmament and arms control fields as an important element to contribute to the maintenance and reinforcement of international peace and stability.
We are convinced that all these processes should go along with the overall improvement of international situation in other spheres, establishment and practical implementation of universal security guarantees, unconditional adherence by States
and international organizations to the norms and basic principles of international law, consolidation of an atmosphere of mutual trust.
Accordance of the credible negative security assurances in the form of an international legally binding instrument will substantially enhance the nonproliferation regime especially given the latest developments in the world's policy. However, as of today, this issue still remains open. We call upon all nuclear weapon states to acknowledge the value of negative security assurances and strictly adhere to their respective pledges.
Mr. Chairman,
We strongly support efforts aimed at ensuring universality of basic instruments in respective areas, namely NPT, CTBT, CWC, BWC, 1925 Geneva Protocol and the Hague Code of Conduct Against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. We urge all states concerned to accede to the above agreements without delay.
GUAM countries fully meet their obligations under relevant international treaties, conventions and multilaterally agreed arrangements and consider achievement of their overall implementation and compliance to be their foreign policies priority. At the same time we believe that work efficiency of existing multilateral mechanisms in the fields of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation has decreased for the last years. We strongly support all efforts to increase efficacy of existing disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation machinery that would undoubtedly contribute to further strengthening of global peace and stability. In this connection we also reiterate our position for the early commencement of negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty within the Conference on Disarmament. Taking this opportunity we would like to thank the US Delegation for circulating the FMCT draft that is being examined by our respective authorities now. At the same time, we encourage constructive, structured and substantive discussions within the CD and hope that the Conference can finally resume its work.
Mr. Chairman,
GUAM countries underscore significance of the safeguards system and the importance of the IAEA work in implementation of the NPT safeguards provisions with a view to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to military purposes, detecting covert weapons activities and reducing the risk of nuclear and radiological terrorism. In this connection we welcome activities within the Advisory Committee on Safeguards and Verification.
GUAM countries fully endorse measures envisaged by the NPT Safeguards Agreement and the Additional protocol. All nuclear facilities as well as nuclear materials on the territories of GUAM countries are subject to the International Atomic Energy Agency full-scope safeguards. Supervision and control measures are implemented for all nuclear materials, irrespective of whether they are being produced, processed or used at any nuclear facility or outside of such facility.
In light of threats posed by the international terrorism and illicit trafficking of
nuclear and related materials, we stand for enhancing both international guidelines and rules of national legislation in the field of export controls and physical protection of nuclear materials.
Amongst other priorities I would like to mention participation at the Proliferation Security Initiative and at the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. We are confident that implementation of both initiatives would further enhance international security and safety. GUAM notes that one of its Member States, Ukraine, participates as a recipient country in the Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. Taking this opportunity we would like to express gratitude to all donor countries that have made their contributions for ensuring implementation of respective projects in Ukraine.
We call upon all Member States to take and strengthen national measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery and materials and technologies related to their manufacture and to support respective international efforts in this sphere.
Mr. Chairman,
We deeply deplore the fact that more than ten years after opening for signature, the CTBT has not yet entered into force. It is our belief that ratification of the Treaty by nuclear weapon States would significantly facilitate its entry into force. At the same time I am proud to say that during the Ukrainian Chairmanship at the CTBTO Preparatory Commission in 2006 all Eastern European countries had ratified the Treaty thus making substantial contribution to the Treaty's coming into effect. We also reiterate our call to all nuclear weapon states to further demonstrate their firm determination to observe the moratorium on nuclear tests or any other nuclear explosions and to keep their commitments once the Treaty enters into force.
We also continue to attach great importance to the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. In this context we consider the respective 1995 NPT Review Conference resolution valid until its goals and objectives are achieved.
Mr, Chairman,
Multilateral approach to the work of NPT PrepCom is fundamental for effective resolution of the problems involved. I hope that despite the existing difficulties in the field of nonproliferation, current session of the Preparatory Committee will end successfully in terms of giving a strong impetus to the renewed nonproliferation endeavors.