Mr. President,
May I start by congratulating you, Ambassador Duarte, on your election as a President of this Conference. Let me assure you that the delegation of Ukraine will work constructively with other delegations to achieve the successful outcome of this important international forum.
Mr. President,
Ukraine shares widely the views expressed by the distinguished representative of Luxemburg on behalf of the European Union. We commend the EU for presenting a well-elaborated paper on main aspects of the Conference.
For thirty-five years the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has been the mainstay of international efforts to contain the spread of nuclear weapons. Regrettably, the past years have revealed some significant gaps in the nuclear non-proliferation regime that have put the NPT under stress and questioned its credibility.
This troubling state of affairs adds crucial importance to the current Conference. We should grasp the opportunity to chart the course of action on how to improve the implementation of the NPT, how to make it more adequate to the present challenges and, finally, how to close the loopholes in the Treaty-based regime.
In this context the delegation of Ukraine stresses the need to build upon the results of the histories 1995 and 2000 NPT Review Conferences and work strenuously towards reaching specific decisions aimed at addressing numerous challenges the NPT faces today. It is our strong-held view that a failure to do so will result in the further erosion of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and thus can have serious repercussions on the world's security and stability.
Mr. President,
Ukraine has repeatedly stated that the NPT is the cornerstone of the global nuclear non- proliferation regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament under Article VI of the Treaty. We continue to attach great importance to achieving the universality of and strict compliance with the NPT.
Last year marked the 10th anniversary since Ukraine had acceded to the NPT and when the START I Treaty entered into force.
This fact is particularly worth reminding since Ukraine's landmark decision to forswear its world third largest nuclear arsenal. Our decision has been crucial for the progress in the nuclear disarmament. We believe that the move Ukraine had made was among the factors that led to the successful outcome of the 1995 NPT Review Conference.
Responsibility and cooperation are the key elements of Ukraine's new Government position in handling our remaining obligations under the relevant international agreements. We count on the world community support in our endeavors.
Mr. President,
We believe that to meet the current challenges faced by the NPT-based regime the world community should fully employ existing legal and institutional mechanisms, first of all the UN machinery and explore new ways to inhibit the spread of nuclear weapons, related materials, equipment and technology.
Much has already been done and is currently being undertaken in this direction. Adoption of the UN Security Council Resolution 1540 has marked a more active involvement of the United Nations in addressing the WMD non-proliferation problem. The Resolution 1540 is, undoubtedly, vital to combating the ever more formidable threat of terrorists acquiring nuclear weapons. Ukraine is committed to the strict implementation of the Resolution provisions and calls upon
other States to follow a suit.
It is our pleasure to state the progress in strengthening the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) - the instrument, which has gained special importance in view of the risk of illicit trafficking in nuclear material and of the nuclear terrorism. Ukraine was among the states, which requested last summer the IAEA Director General to convene a diplomatic conference to amend the CPPNM. We strongly hope that the conference will be a success.
A slow but steady progress has been made in the universalization of the IAEA Additional
Protocol. As an inalienable part of the strengthened safeguards system, it serves as an extremely important tool for sustaining an environment of peaceful use of nuclear energy without the threat of proliferation. In this connection we strongly support the need to enhance the IAEA verification role. We also take the view that the universal adoption and full implementation of the strengthened safeguards system is a prerequisite of an effective and credible nuclear non-proliferation regime. As of today Ukraine is in the process of completing domestic legal procedures necessary to being the Additional Protocol into force.
Mr. President,
Ukraine actively participates in all major multilateral export control regimes. We strictly abide by the basic guidelines set out by those regimes and believe that they should be further enhanced.
Concerning new measures undertaken by the world community to prevent the nuclear proliferation, Ukraine notes with satisfaction the Global Threat Reduction Initiative launched last year and the Proliferation Security Initiative. Both have demonstrated a high efficiency. We participate in PSI and currently are exploring the ways to broaden our operational activity in it.
In this context we would also like to stress the importance of the G-8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. From our point of view, the GP carries a great potential in terms of addressing current negative tendencies in the field of nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament. We welcome the progress in the implementation of the program reported by the G-8 members at their Sea Island summit in June of last year. Ukraine on its part is ready to contribute to further development of the Global Partnership based on the experience gained in the CTR implementation process.
Mr. President,
Tens of thousands of nuclear weapons persist to exist. In view of this fact we urge the nuclear weapon States to demonstrate in practice their determination to pursue nuclear disarmament process under Article VI. Ukraine, as a State that has contributed essentially to the cause of nuclear disarmament within the START I framework, believes that the reductions in nuclear arsenals, in particular under the Moscow Treaty, should be irreversible.
Ukraine continues to call upon the two nuclear weapon States to pursue reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons in accordance with the 1991/1992 Presidential Nuclear Initiatives.
In view of the increased attention to the implementation of the non-proliferation commitments we especially emphasize the need for a balanced treatment of the Treaty - problems and progress in implementing both - the non-proliferation and disarmament clauses - should be equally reviewed and addressed. There can be no progress in combating nuclear proliferation scourge without tangible steps in nuclear disarmament and vice versa.
At the 1995 NPT Review Conference, the reaffirmation of the nuclear weapon States' disarmament obligations was essential to the indefinite extension of the Treaty. At the 2000 Review Conference, States-parties went even further having agreed to a 13-point action plan, including the bringing into force of the CTBT, making future nuclear arms reductions irreversible and verifiable, and concluding a verifiable treaty to ban fissile material production for weapons within five years.
Unfortunately, many of those obligations remain fulfilled incompletely. The prospects of the CTBT entry into force still look gloomy. Ukraine continues to underscore the importance and urgency of an early entry into force of the Treaty and calls upon all States who have not yet done so to adhere to the Treaty without delay and unconditionally, especially those on the list of 44 States whose ratification is indispensable.
As the regional facilitator in accordance with the Final Declaration of the 2003 Conference Ukraine will continue to promote the early entry into force of the CTBT. Pending its entry into force, we urge all States with nuclear capabilities to abide by the global nuclear weapon test moratorium and refrain from any actions, which may undermine the CTBT objectives.
We stress the necessity to spare no effort in order to surmount protracted political impasse in the Conference on Disarmament and to commence negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT).
The situation on the Korean peninsula continues to cause concern. Ukraine shares a deep conviction that the DPRK should relinquish its nuclear ambitions and resume its cooperation with the IAEA. This country should return into compliance with its obligations under the NPT and the IAEA Safeguards agreement without delay. Ukraine calls upon the DPRK and the States that seek to play a leading role in the settlement of the crisis on the Korean peninsula to do their best to resume the six-party talks with an aim to settle the crisis in accordance with the rules of international law.
Mr. President,
Ukraine believes that legally binding security assurances by the nuclear weapon States to the non- nuclear weapon States-parties to the NPT will significantly strengthen the nuclear non- proliferation regime by eliminating plausible incentives for pursuing nuclear capabilities. We strongly encourage nuclear weapon States to reconfirm their commitments laid down in the relevant UNSC Resolutions and the decisions of the 1995 and 2000 NPT Review Conferences.
Ukraine proceeds from the understanding that the establishment of zones free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction essentially facilitates the maintenance of peace and security at both - global and regional levels. We note that the establishment of nuclear-weapon- free zones all over the globe has been a major contribution towards enhancing international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and reaching nuclear disarmament goals. Ukraine welcomes the efforts made by the five States in Central Asia with a view to establishing a NWFZ in that region.
Mr. President,
Enhanced participation by civil society in the work of the NPT is a remarkable event. Ukraine supports the working paper submitted by Egypt, Hungary, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Poland and Sweden on disarmament and non-proliferation education. We call upon the Conference to encourage States to undertake concrete activities to implement the relevant UN study recommendations in this sphere.
Distinguished delegates,
Given the current context of proliferation crisis, success of this Review Conference will depend on our ability to agree on substantive measures to meet the pressing challenges. The Conference needs first and foremost to confirm the credibility of the NPT as one of the main elements of international peace and security and to demonstrate the efficiency of the review process.
In conclusion let me express a strong hope for the constructive work during the Conference in order to achieve fruitful results.
Thank you, Mr. President.
