1
Please, check against cleli~.ct-\*
STATEMENT
by the Delegation of Ukraine
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on assuming this important office. I am
confident that under your able leadership the First session of the Preparatory Committee will
be a success story. Please be assured of Ukraine's full support in your endeavors.
Distinguished delegates,
I am addressing the session as the representative of a state which 18 years ago made
unprecedented step and voluntarily renounced its inherited nuclear arsenal - the world's third
largest at the time. In 1994 Ukraine joined the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon state and since
then has been consistently undertaking steps aimed at making nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation
work. We remain strongly convinced that nuclear weapons do not strengthen
security, but rather create inore tensions and risks for states who strive to acquire them.
It is widely recognized that Ukraine's action enhanced the NPT regime, had a
beneficial impact on international security and strategic stability, and created favorable
conditions for further steps to reduce nuclear arsenals.
Our decision, which can serve as an example for the others, has been made with clear
understanding that relevant political security assurances, which Ukraine received in 1994
through the Budapest Memorandum, constitute an integral part of our nuclear disarinainent
move. It is our strong position that the security assurances for the states which renounced
their nuclear arsenals, as well as for the states which are non-members of any inilitary
alliances, have to be reflected in a legally binding international document. It is also important
that the basic right of states to choose for themselves means for providing national security
and national interests should be duly taken into account in the process of elaboration of
international and regional security structures.
The decisions of the 2010 Washington and 2012 Seoul Nuclear Security Sulninit have
repeatedly underlined the importance of nuclear security as an integral part of the
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The same consideration is contained in
the Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, where the Action 61 of the
Recommendations explicitly encourage states concerned, on a voluntary basis, to further
minimize highly enriched uranium in civilian stocks and use, where technically and
economically feasible.
After careful consideration in Ukraine we became convinced that modern nuclear
science can move painlessly towards abolition of the use of highly enriched nuclear materials
with making no harm to the research process itself.
In line with our analysis and as the next contribution of Ukraine to the course of nonproliferation
and disarmament the President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych in 2010 has
announced our decision to get rid of all national stocks of highly enriched uranium by 201 2,
provided there is sufficient international assistance. We have already fulfilled entirely our 
pledge and removed all of our HEU stock for its downgrading to the low enriched uranium to
be used by the Ukrainian nuclear research facilities. The meaning of our voluntary step is
crystal clear - Ukraine remains consistent, predictable and reliable member of international
co~nmunity, makes an active contribution to combating nuclear terrorism and focus its efforts
on strengthening the physical protection of nuclear materials. We expect that our example
will serve as a pattern for the others. Our decision is also another proof of our commitment to
the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1887(2009).
Turning to the Treaty itself, I would like to emphasize that it is not only an essential
basis for pursuing nuclear disarmament. It is a mirror of global political reality. For forty
years the Treaty has been at the core of international efforts aimed at containing spread of
nuclear weapons. Likewise, for forty years states have been taking steps to reach this goal. A
lot has been achieved, indeed.
Yet, although it seems that the fear of globaI nuclear war has receded irrevocably, two
major challenges are still in place. First, despite all reduction efforts, existing nuclear arsenals
are striking. Second, a nuinber of gaps in the nuclear non-proliferation regime remain. Both
pose a threat to world peace and security.
Recent events give us hope that states realize the dramatic importance of these
challenges and are committed to address them resolutely. Washington and Seoul Summits on
Nuclear Security and the new START Treaty between the United States of America and the
Russian Federation are the milestone undertakings, which set the tone for further activities.
Mr. Chairman,
Ukraine firmly stands for comprehensive disarmament under effective international
control. We attach paramount importance to achieving universality of and strict compliance
with the NPT. No need to say that the NPT system has been under severe strain in recent
years while the International Atomic Energy Agency has been struggling with verification,
compliance and enforcement challenges. This Preparatory Committee's session should pay
proper attention to the implementation of non-proliferation commitments. Failure to do so
may result in further erosion of the regime and will seriously affect international security.
In 2010 the State parties of the NPT reaffirmed that the IAEA, and in particular its
safeguards system, remains an essential tool for the effective implementation of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, play an indispensable role in the implementation of the Treaty and
help to create an environment conducive to nuclear co-operation.
According to Article I11 of the NPT the acceptance of safeguards is of paramount
importance in ensuring nuclear non-proliferation and providing effective control over
sensitive materials and activities. I believe that an increased nuinber of countries which have
brought into force the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol
over the past year is a positive sign in development of the culture of non-proliferation.
In this regard, I would like to stress that every country should work hard to receive the
broader conclusion by the IAEA on the implementation of the safeguards obligations. In 20 10
according to the Safeguards Implementation Report of the IAEA my own country Ukraine
has received such a conclusion for the first time. And starting from the 1 May 2012 Ukraine
will receive a state level integrated safeguards approach.
Distinguished colleagues,
The Treaty requires a more efficient mechanism of adequate response to today's
challenges. In our view, one of the measures that will strengthen the Treaty is the elaboration
of the modalities under which states can implement Article X of the NPT.
Having said this, we would also like to underline the importance of strict compliance
with the UN Security Council resolutions on the prevention of black market supply networks,
trafficking and acquisition of nuclear materials by non-state actors. 
We also underscore the importance of strengthening physical protection of nuclear
inaterial and facilities given the increased risk of nuclear terrorism. There is a strong need for
adherence to existing legal instruments, especially to the International Convention on the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the amended Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material.
Another iinportant element of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament is the FissiIe
Material Cut Off Treaty. Ukraine deeply regrets the continuing slow mood of the Conference
on Disarmament on this issue.
We also strongly hope that the renewed commitment of key states regarding the
ratification of the CTBT will allow us to finally realize the long standing goal of its entry into
force.
Mr. Chairman,
One of the outcomes of the High-level meeting "Kyiv Summit on Safe and Innovative
Use of Nuclear Energy" held on 26th April 201 1 in Ukraine has become the recognition by its
participants of the necessity to secure adequate level of nuclear safety and security, as a key
priority, throughout each and every stage of nuclear energy production.
Ukraine considers peaceful uses of nuclear energy as an equally iinportant NPT pillar.
We underscore the vital need for peaceful nuclear technology for sustainable development of
nations, provided that nuclear activities are subject to full scope safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Given the rising international demand for nuclear energy, we acknowledge a number
of initiatives, which can facilitate multilateral solutions for the expanding need for nuclear
fuel and services, while minimizing the risk of proliferation. Their proper implementation can
provide the interested countries with the necessary back-up mechanisms.
It is along with these lines that we in Ukraine also positively view the establishment of
the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank (LEU Bank). This fuel bank is an iinportant
contribution to the future equitable and sustainable international nuclear fuel cycle regime.
Finally, talking about the NPT review process itself, it would be relevant, in our view,
to evaluate carefully the impleinentation of the 1995 and 2000 decisions on improving its
effectiveness. As of now, we have on the table some very promising proposals to streamline
the NPT review process. We fully support these initiatives and urge all delegations to
consider them carefully in the coming weeks.
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates,
The year 2010 was an iinportant milestone in the NPT review process. At the 2010
NPT Review Conference ine~nber states have reaffirmed that the Treaty on the Nonproliferation
of Nuclear Weapons remains the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation
regime and the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament and peaceful use
of nuclear energy worldwide.
The results of the 2010 NPT Review Conference backed up with the picture of the
failure of previous review cycle sent a clear signal that the credibility of the NPT could be
fostered. The consensus outcome of the last NPT Review Conference was a balanced Final
Document, which has set a practical agenda with the Action Plan covering all three pillars of
the Treaty. The tangible substantive results reached by that Conference on the forwardlooking
Action Plan proved that co-operative, multilateral non-proliferation efforts could
work if there is a necessary political will. We call on all delegations at this session of the
Preparatory Colninittee to pursue this course.
Thank you. 