Mr. President,
At the outset, and on behalf of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations, it gives me great pleasure to start my statement by congratulating you on your election as President of the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Given your valuable diplomatic experience and management skills, we are confident that you will competently lead our deliberations aiming at converging our views on issues concerning nuclear disarmament.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Presidents of the three preparatory sessions of this conference for their valuable efforts in facilitating its work, and to associate myself with the representative of Malaysia in his statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement.
Mr. President,
While this conference is being held, the international community faces very complicated conditions, at the international and regional levels, due to the spread of the armament race in several regions. This situation has not only created security tensions and military confrontations, but it has also threatened our natural and historical legacy, as well as our environment, which constitutes the main source of our power, survival and stability.
A quick glance at the present international developments will show that, inspite of the massive and persistent efforts made by the United Nations, including the agreements reached in the Review Conferences of the NPT in 1995 and 2000, several nuclear states still develop their reactors and military arsenals which include nuclear missiles and strategic and tactic weapons. Moreover, many non-nuclear states endeavor, according to their own understanding of security deterrence, to experiment and produce such weapons for non-peaceful uses.
Our people's concerns about the nuclear threats are no longer limited to the armament race, as they now reflect other forms of danger such as the attempts of trafficking fissionable materials and other dangerous materials for the purpose of producing nuclear weapons by non-governmental actors. Such attempts have heightened the possibilities of providing access to these dangerous weapons to criminal and irresponsible terrorist groups, and posed grave threat to the regional and international security and stability.
Mr. President,
The UAE, which acceded to the treaties of Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons including the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Treaty out of its firm conviction in the importance of enhancing the universality of such treaties in creating a world free from all forms of threats, is concerned about the clear distinction between the nuclear states' commitments towards the reduction and elimination of their nuclear weapons and the right of non-nuclear states to have unconditional security assurances. Such distinction has created a diplomatic impasse during the Review Conferences of the Treaty and in the Disarmament Commission. It has also affected the credibility and universality of this treaty which is considered the cornerstone of the international efforts of disarmament of strategic weapons and of the vertical and horizontal systems of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this context, we call upon this important gathering to reach a consensus on a common international strategy for nuclear disarmament. Such a strategy must be binding to all states and based upon the principals of international law, and the Charter, resolutions, multilateral agreements and protocols of the UN, which call for strengthening the system of non- proliferation and elimination of weapons of mass destruction in order to ease security tensions and reduce their threat. In this connection, we reiterate the necessity of the following procedures:
Urging nuclear states to start serious negotiations that may lead to full implementation of the 13 steps agreed upon in the Review Conference of year 2000, and total destruction of comprehensive nuclear and strategic weapons within a specific timeframe. Total elimination of these weapons is the only assurance for not using these weapons or threatening their use.
Establishing specialized international committees and mechanisms by the Conference on Disarmament, according to article 6 of the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty, to be responsible for following up efforts of systematic destruction of nuclear weapons. This procedure should include establishment of an international agency responsible for negotiating a non-discriminatory multilateral treaty prohibiting production of fissionable material for the purposes of manufacturing nuclear weapons.
Strengthening international efforts made to develop an effective and unconditional international instrument that binds nuclear states to provide the necessary security assurances to non-nuclear states, and ensure their protection from use or the threat of using these weapons against them.
Demanding non-nuclear states, which endeavor to have acquisition of such weapons, to review their policies, and to resort to self control in solving their bilateral and regional disputes through negotiations and peaceful means in accordance with the provisions of the international law and the principals of the UN Charter.
Enhancing the international system of verification of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and implementation of the Code of Practice on the Transboundary Movements of Radioactive Waste in order to promote principals of transparency, objectivity and equality among states.
Reaffirming the inalienable right of state parties to this Treaty to conduct research and produce nuclear power for development and peaceful purposes. Such states should have free access to modern nuclear technologies used for peaceful purposes without obstacles or discrimination.
Mr. President,
While we commend regional and sub-regional efforts made successfully to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in many parts of the world, we condemn the position of Israel regarding the establishment of a similar zone in the Middle East which is reflected in its insistence on keeping its nuclear reactors and military arsenal away from international control to ensure its military superiority and to continue its illegitimate occupation of the Palestinian and Arab territories, in defiance of the principles of international law and international legitimate resolutions.
In this regard, we urge state parties to the NPT to take effective measures in order to compel Israel, the sole country in the region which has not yet acceded to this Treaty, to dismantle and eliminate its nuclear weapons, and to accede, unconditionally, to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. Israel must also subject its nuclear, military and civil facilities to the supervision and the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency in accordance with the international legitimate resolutions, and the resolutions of the Sixth Review Conference of year 2000. Furthermore, we call for the discontinuation of scientific and technological assistance directed to Israel, which is used in developing its nuclear facilities in order to avoid their threatening impact on the efforts of the peace process in the Middle East.
Mr. President
In conclusion, we hope that our deliberations in this conference will lead to a consensus on renewing states' commitment to this Treaty, and to strengthening the role of the United Nations in addressing such an important issue in order to create a comprehensive and multilateral approach for developing the process of disarmament and ban of nuclear weapons, and creating an international environment that is free from all forms of threats and which is capable of implementing sustainable development plans and creating prosperity for all.
Thank you Mr. President
