Mr. President,
At the outset, 1 would like to congratulate you on your election to chair the 2010 NPT Review Conference. I am confident that your leadership and diplomatic skills will result in a positive outcome from the conference. I would also like to associate myself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement by the representative of Indonesia. .
40 years ago, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) put into place one of the most important international treaties which has helped to limit the number of states that possess nuclear. Dozens of other states might have had nuclear weapons today had it not been for the NPT and associated measures. Over the years the NPT framework, along with effective diplomacy, has also led some states to abandon their nuclear weapons ambitions while others have given up their nuclear weapons and joined the NPT.
Notwithstanding this positive outcome, the implementation of the NPT still faces major challenges. Lack of concrete steps to disarmament; the existence of states outside the treaty; issues of non-compliance , and nuclear proliferation threats are some of the major challenges the NPT regime faces today.
Mr. President,
At the root of its commitment to ensure global security and prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons lies the UAE decision to join the NPT in 1995. This was followed by the ratification of the CTBT in 2000 and the conclusion of Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement (CSA) in 2003. The UAE also signed the additional protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguard Agreement (CSA) in 2009, with the ratification process being in its final stages.
Today, the UAE government is taking further tangible steps to support the non-proliferation efforts of the international community. These steps include the development of an innovative model for adopting peaceful nuclear energy to meet growing domestic energy demand.
The UAE's awareness of Hs rights and obligations under the treaty, and its understanding of the- unique circumstances surrounding the use of nuclear materials, led to the development and % subsequent announcement of its ;policy on the Evaluation and Potential Development of Peaceful Nuclear Energy" in April 2008. Commitments to the highest standards of nuclear security and non-proliferation represent major pillars of this policy. In an effort to transform these aspirations into reality, the UAE has taken a number of groundbreaking steps, including the decision to renounce the development of domestic enrichment and reprocessing capabilities.
The UAE supports the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a right of every state party to the treaty. We also believe that the development of peaceful nuclear energy should be conducted in a responsible manner. In a world where nuclear proliferation is a major concern , states that are developing nuclear energy uses should adhere to comprehensive safeguards measures; should cooperate fully with the IAEA in its verification mandate; and should take steps to address any concerns of the international community. Furthermore, States with nuclear capabilities are obligated to assist non-nuclear states in developing peaceful uses of nuclear energy. UAE also stresses on the important role of the IAEA in achieving the treaty goals. UAE's interest in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and as an active member of the IAEA , has submitted its nomination for a seat at the IAEA Board of Governors for the period 2010-2012 , and looking forward for States support for its candidacy.
Mr. President,
We have seen many examples of the challenges facing the treaty today, This calls for measures to strengthen the treaty, such as strengthening IAEA Safeguards regime. The main objective of the safeguards regime is to prevent the non-peaceful use of nuclear material and to reinforce mutual trust and transparency as well as to allow all states parties to the NPT, under secure conditions and with mutual confidence, to exercise their right to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy without discrimination. In this context, the credibility and effectiveness of the IAEA Safeguards are main factors to the responsible expansion in nuclear energy uses. The adoption of the additional protocol to the comprehensive safeguards agreement is important to strengthen this system, and therefore export of nuclear technology should gives a priority for countries which has the additional protocol in force.
Other NPT provisions should also be strengthened and revisited such as the withdrawal provision, in particular for states which benefitted from the transfer of nuclear knowledge and technology under the treaty.
Mr. President,
On the issue of nuclear disarmament, the UAE considers that the only way to ensure the non-use or threat to use nuclear weapons is the total elimination of those weapons. We ..welcome the■ steps taken by the United States and the Russian Federation in the recent START 2 agreement. in this regard, the UAE calls on nuclear states to take serious further steps towards disarmament, with ultimate goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, The UAE reiterates its call for states that are not party to the treaty to join the treaty.

The establishment of nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East is a priority in order to demonstrate progress and effectiveness of the treaty
In conclusion, we hope that this conference will focus on positive and realistic action plans that will genuinely reinforce the NPT. UAE hopes, through the adoption and implementation of its policies and actions in developing a peaceful nuclear energy program, to establish a new model via which non-nuclear states may explore and deploy nuclear energy with the full support and confidence of the international community. We look forward for the support of states with advancement in nuclear technology to support this model where the commitment to transparency and highest standards of nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation constitute a foundation for the support and the development of nuclear programs.
The review process comes with a lot of challenges, but given the importance of the NPT in ensuring global peace and security, the UAE hopes that the parties will work together constructively to achieve a positive outcome.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



