Statement by Thomas Countryman .
Assistant Secretary for International Security and Nonproliferation
Department of State
United States of America
General Debate
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
April 22,2013
Check Against Delivery 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the United States Delegation, let
me add my voice to those congratulating you on your selection to chair this second
Preparatory Cormnittee meeting. I want to assure you of our Delegation's
readiness to work with you and other delegations here to build on the encouraging
results of the 20 10 Review Conference and to advance preparations for 20 15.
I would like to begin my remarks by reading a message fiom Secretary of
State John Keny to the 20 13 NPT Preparatory Committee:
Begin Message
On behalf of the United States, please accept my hopes for and personal
commitment to a successful and productive meeting of the preparatory committee
for the 201 5 Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT).
This summer, we will celebrate the 45th anniversary of the signing of the
NPT. Although conceived in a different era when the hands of the boomsday
Clock pointed precariously towards disaster, the treaty's goal of preventing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons remains no less relevant today. This is why, in
2009, President Obama re-affirmed our nation's support for the treaty and called
on all countries to join us in working to secure the peace and security of a world
free of the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
The President's agenda is rooted in the interest almost all of us share in
preserving the treaty as a basis for global cooperation. We will continue to do our
part by taking action to reduce the number of nuclear weapons, their roles, and the
likelihood of their use. At the same time, we will work to strengthen international
safeguards and encourage peaceful uses of nuclear energy by states that meet their 
obligations. In response to those who abuse the treaty, we will continue to insist
that violations be confronted with the urgency they require. A treaty that is
universally followed will best advance international security and nuclear energy's
contribution to peace, health, and prosperity.
I wish this conference well and offer my hope for a productive discussion
that builds on the consensus action plan approved by the 20 10 NPT Review
Conference and that puts us on a path to success in 20 15.
End Message
Mr. Chairman, the United States shares the view of many here that
agreement on the 20 10 Action Plan represented an important achievement. It was
not only the first of its kind in the NPT's history, but it reset the NPT and each of
its three pillars at the center of efforts to build a safer world: one in which the
barriers to nuclear proliferation remain high; violators are held accountable; and
progress to reduce nuclear weapons, contain risks of nuclear terrorism, and expand
peaceful uses of nuclear energy is not only possible but underway. This is the
direction we seek. It is one that we believe all NPT parties should support and that
will keep us on course toward our ultimate goal of achieving the peace and security
of a world without nuclear weapons.
Some may argue that the Action Plan is not perfect. We agree; it does not
reflect every U.S. priority. I am quite sure others view it similarly fiom their
perspective. This imperfection is to be expected given the complexities of a
multilateral negotiation involving the Treaty's diverse membership. But even an
imperfect document is still valuable. And in this instance, the NPT membership 
should take pride in having adopted a forward-looking set of principles and
commitments that so clearly reinforce the NPT and its underlying purposes.
We understand that progress on the Action Plan should naturally be the
subject of review by NPT parties. We encourage such a review, and a dialogue
that is balanced, addressing each of the Treaty's three pillars; substantive; candid;
and pursued with the aim of preserving collective support for the Treaty as an
instrument of security.
Mr. Chairman, allow me to say a few words on implementation of the
Treaty. We will have more to say on these topics later in the week.
Disarmament
The United States acknowledges its special responsibility to work toward
nuclear disarmament and to help create the conditions for a world without nuclear
weapons. President Obarna has made clear our unequivocal support for this goal.
It will not be achieved overnight or absent further improvements in the
international security environment. But as the President has said, we must
continue this journey with concrete steps.
Mr. Chairman, the United States is making good on that pledge. We are
reducing the role and numbers of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy.
We have committed not to develop new nuclear warheads or pursue new military
missions for nuclear weapons. We are implementing the New START Treaty with
Russia that will reduce deployed nuclear warheads to levels not seen since the
1950s - more than a decade before the NPT entered into force. President Obama
has committed the United States to pursue still deeper cuts. And let me be clear:
We share concerns about the profound and serious consequences of nuclear 
weapons use and have articulated our deep and abiding interest in extending
forever the 68-year record of non-use. And we will continue our diligent work
with our P5 partners to meet our commitments under the Action Plan.
Nonproliferation
Let me also state clearly that disarmament is not an obligation limited to the
five NPT nuclear-weapon states. It will require action by all NPT Parties, who
collectively share a responsibility to support the nonproliferation regime and
ensue its rules are robust and fully respected.
The Action Plan makes clear the importance of resolving all cases of
noncompliance with IAEA safeguards. The United States regards noncompliance
by Iran and Syria as serious threats to the integrity of the nonproliferation regime.
NPT Parties must stand shoulder-to-shoulder in demanding these governments
return to full compliance with the NPT, consistent with their international
obligations. States must be held accountable for their violations ofthe Treaty or
for abusing the withdrawal provision. This should be of concern to all NPT
Parties.
Looking forward, we must also ensure the IAEA continues to have the
resources and authorities it needs to verify peaceful nuclear uses in conformity
with Article I11 of the Treaty. A system of IAEA safeguards that enjoys broad
political support and is technically sound benefits the security of all NPT Parties.
It demonstrates to everyone the commitment not to pursue nuclear weapons and
makes peaceful nuclear cooperation possible. With this in mind, we will continue
working with Parties to gain acceptance of the Additional Protocol, along with a
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, as the standard for NPT verification and 
encourage further IAEA work to strengthen safeguards implementation so that the
international community can be assured that a state's nuclear activities are entirely
peaceful.
The United States also wishes to highlight the indispensible role of nuclear
security and prevention of nuclear terrorism in advancing our nonproliferation
goals. We have made great strides to address this threat through the Nuclear
Security Summit process launched by President Obama in 2010 and look forward
to expanding our partnerships, accelerating cooperation, and establishing durable
institutions to carry on this vital work. The IAEA's International Conference on
Nuclear Security this July will be important gathering to advance this urgent
priority.
Peaceful Uses
Mr. Chairman, when nuclear security and nonproliferation are reinforced,
we are in a stronger position to promote the safe and responsible use of nuclear
energy. We recognize the right of NPT Parties to access peaceful nuclear energy
consistent with the Treaty's nonproliferation provisions. There is no more
generous partner than the United States. We contribute more than any single state
to IAEA promotional programs that benefit the Treaty's non-nuclear weapon
states, and pledged to provide $50 million over five years to a new IAEA Peaceful
Uses Initiative (PUI). I am pleased to note that more than 120 IAEA Member
States have benefited fiom PUI assistance.
We understand that nations will make their own choices about nuclear
energy. But international cooperation can offer new and beneficial opportunities
that empower those choices and ensure the safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. This is why President Obama called for new frameworks for civil nuclear
cooperation, and it is why my government supports the establishment of an IAEA
fuel bank and related measures to assure nuclear fuel supply in a manner that
contributes to the Treaty's nonproliferation goals. We look forward to discussing
these topics further this week.
Conclusion
Before closing, I would like to comment on efforts to hold a conference on a
WMD-free zone in the Middle East, a subject on which the United States will have
more to say later. I emphasize that the United States supports the goal of
establishing a WMD-free zone in the Middle East and the convening of a
conference involving all states in the region to discuss it. Although it proved not
possible to meet in Helsinki last year, my government remains firmly committed to
working with the Facilitator, the other conveners, and with all states in the region
to take steps that will create conditions for a successful and meaningful conference.
On that basis, we hope the relevant parties can agree to hold it soon. Reaching
Helsinki, and success at Helsinki, will require the states of the region to engage
with each other.
Mr. Chairman, the NPT remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
nonproliferation regime and a basis for international nuclear cooperation. That
regime is not without its challenges, but none are insurmountable and none are
beyond discussion.
We look forward to a productive dialogue at this Preparatory Committee
meeting, and as we work together to ensure the Treaty's contributions to
international peace and security are strengthened and endure. Thank you. 