Mr. Chairman
I have the honor, on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, to congratulate you on your presidency on the third session of the preparatory committee for the 2005 NPT Review Conference. We are confident that your political expertise will contribute in directing its meetings successfully for the good and safety of humanity. In this occasion I would like to thank your predecessor the Chairman of the second session for his efforts towards strengthening our deliberation. We would like to associate ourselves to the statements delivered by the representatives of Malaysia on behalf of the Nam and the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Arab Group.
Mr. Chairman,
Despite the lapse of 35 years since the development of the Non-proliferation Treaty, and the convening of a number of meetings and conferences on the reviewr of this treaty, yet the progress achieved by the international community towards the disarmament of this lethal weapon, or towards exploiting it to serve the goals of peace and development, has not reached the level of our expectations. The issue of nuclear disarmament is still a priority on the agenda of our organization and other regional fora .It is not limited to the persistence of states possessing nuclear capabilities on maintaining and piling their nuclear facilities and stocks, and enhancing their launching systems, but include the resort of many other states, openly or covertly, to a race towards testing such weapons and attempting to posses it according ;;o their perception of a strategic national defense, as prevailed during the cold war era.
The gap between the ambitions of the states that possess nuclear weapons and the demands of non-nuclear-weapon states, which are committed to the provisions of the Treaty as well as relevant laws and legal measures, is increasingly widening. This has made attaining the goals of implementing the universality of the Treaty, which represent the main tool of international strategic disarmament and vertical and horizontal nuclear non- proliferation, very difficult to achieve. Therefore, our major priority should be to enhance our deliberations in this meeting by focusing on six main axes , which contribute towards making gradual scientific progress towards nuclear disarmament.
1-	Demanding the nuclear - weapons possessing countries to immediately, fuhy and openly implement all the pledges they made during the NPT Review Conferences in 1995 and 2000, including the engagement in sincere and effective negotiations on a step by step program that ensures implementing these pledges according to a time frame for the thirteen functional steps agreed on during the 2000 Review Conference, which aim to complete and irreversible elimination of all their existing nuclear stocks, technology, productive capacities, and launching systems , according to article 6 of the Treaty and paragraphs 3 and 4 of 1995 Review Conference resolution on the principles and goals of Nuclear Non-proliferation and disarmament.
2-	Preventing the expansion of nuclear arms race to newr regions, especially the Arab Gulf region and neighboring regions that have been under tension for decades. Therefore , we demand all countries which attempt to carry out nuclear testing, developing and piling fissile material, to rethink these policies which threaten international and regional peace and security, and take necessary measures to guarantee the stopping of all these endeavors in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, the principles of the international law and the relevant international legal resolutions.
3-	Supporting the efforts aiming to establish an international binding instrument that ensures security guarantees and protection of non-nuclear-weapons countries from all possibilities of being attacked, or threatened, with nuclear weapons, until the complete elimination of these weapons.
4-	Taking more effective measures to ensure accession of countries that are not party to the Treaty to do so in order to strengthen the universality and effectiveness of the Treaty.
5-	Encouraging the countries to enter into legal agreements and arrangements aiming to establish a nuclear weapons free region and sub regions. Experiences in establishing these zones during the last two decades, hade proven successful in reducing nuclear proliferation and created a more stable environment for trust building, cooperation and development.
6-	Reiterating the unalienable right of all countries, in particular the developing countries, to produce and exploit nuclear energy for scientific research and peaceful purposes, as well as their right to attain nuclear technology without discrimination or any other obstacles. In this regard, there should be a commitment to establish an impartial mechanism to monitor this end.
Mr. Chairman ,
The UAE, along with all Arab countries, is a party to the NPT. It is convinced that the transparency and universality of multilateral disarmament are for the benefit of economic and social development of humanity. Therefore we are very concerned about the international leniency towards Israel refusal to accede to the NPT, and that it is the sole state in the region that possesses nuclear reactors and dangerous arsenals, which results in perpetuating the present tension and conflict in the region, already caused by its occupation of the Ar&b and Palestinian territories. Therefore, and while we welcome the decision taken by Libya to subject its nuclear facilities to the safeguard of the IAEA, we call upon the international community to address such nuclear-weapons exceptionalism of Israel, which, if not corrected, would pose a direct threat to the regional and international peace and security, and will result in a hurmrn and regional disaster. Therefore we appeal to this meeting to recommend the 2005 Review Conference, to establish a subsidiary body to explore ways of effective and serious implementation of the 1995 Review Conference resolution on the Middle East, which is an inseparable provision of the NPT. In this course, we stress the responsibility of the states parties to the Treaty, especially nuclear- weapons possessing states, to exert all efforts to compel Israel to accede, unconditionally, to the NPT and comply to the provisions on the Middle East resolution, which includes dismantling all her military nuclear facilities and subjecting them to the safeguard of the IAEA, similar to other countries in the region, refrain from delivering to Israel all financial and technical assistance that is used in activities of nuclear nature and ensure its compliance in order to end the escalation of security in the Middle East region and make it free of nuclear weapons , similar to other regions in the world.
Mr. President
Finally, we reaffirm that the dealing with the nuclear threat and the enforcement of non-proliferation, should be based on the principles of justice, transparency and equality. This ensures the universality of the NPT, and protects the world from the possibility of catastrophic nuclear confrontations. We hope that the deliberations of this meeting conclude to a consensus on all the major issues we are seized of, which will enable the coming Review Conference to take the necessary effective measures to ensure the world's commitment to this Treaty.
Thank you Mr. Chairman