Statement by Ambassador Susan F. Burk
Special Representative of the President for Nuclear Nonproliferation
Department of State
United States of America
General Debate
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
April 30,2012 
(As Prepared) Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the United States
Delegation, let me add my voice to those delegations that have congratulated you
on your selection to chair the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee to lay the
groundwork for the 20 15 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference.
You, like many of us here today, are a veteran of the 20 10 NPT Review
Conference, and we share a desire to build on the encouraging results of that
conference and move the agenda forward. I want to assure you of our Delegation's
commitment to work with you and our NPT partners to ensure the success of this
body and, through our work, to sustain and reinforce the NPT.
Mr. Chairman, the United States looks forward during this PrepCom
meeting to sharing detailed information on our efforts over the past two years to
follow-up on the commitments we made in 2010. So I will not take time this
morning to catalogue these activities. Let me say, however, that the United States
continues to take those commitments seriously, and we have been working - and
will continue to work - to translate them into actions and accomplishments. We
look forward, as well, to hearing from other Parties on their own efforts to
implement the Action Plan adopted by the 201 0 RevCon. We all have a role to
play in bringing the 2010 Action Plan to fi-uition.
Today, I would like to share some thoughts on how the United States is
approaching this Preparatory Committee meeting and the 201 5 review cycle.
Lessons Learned from the 2010 NPT Review Conference
We are concentrating on using the lessons learned from 201 0 as we prepare
for 201 5. This new NPT review cycle follows our successfbl collaboration during
the 20 10 NPT Review Conference. That Conference was an exercise in 
constructive and creative multilateralism. The NPT Parties defied the skeptics who
saw a treaty regime under siege and little chance of agreement among so many
states with such a wide range of views on such a broad and often contentious
agenda.
By reaching across traditional regional and political lines, NPT Parties
worked together successfully to find common ground. That effort produced a
unique and unprecedented NPT Action Plan that was adopted by consensus, a real
achievement given both the sheer number and complexity of the issues and the
variety of perspectives and priorities countries brought to the table. This Plan
reflects agreement on a forward-looking agenda that encompasses both essential
principles and specific actions that each Party can take to reinforce the NPT and
contribute to the achievement of the Treaty's fundamental objectives.
The Action Plan, however, also reflects the limits of multilateralism when
the goal is consensus. It does not contain every state's list of priorities, particularly
because it does not address some very serious challenges to the Treaty, to the
credibility of the global nonproliferation regime, and to international security in
general in a level of detail justified by the gravity of these challenges. In
particular, the Action Plan does not address as clearly and strongly as it should
have the unresolved cases of noncompliance with the Treaty's nonproliferation
obligations. Nonetheless, the Plan covers most NPT issues, reflects a balanced
approach to the three pillars of the NPT, and does acknowledge that full
compliance with the Treaty's nonproliferation obligations, like progress on nuclear
disarmament and access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, is essential. The
Plan remains an excellent point of departure for our efforts that begin during this
Preparatory Committee meeting. 
The Three Pillars
The NPT is the cornerstone of the international nuclear nonproliferation
regime and a key element of the international security architecture. It is both an
essential legal barrier to the further spread of nuclear weapons and the only
international agreement with nuclear disarmament as one of its objectives. mile
the Treaty is very much a product of its time, it has also stood the test of time. It
may, in fact, be even more important today than in the past.
The NPT's basic bargain, as President Obama has noted, remains sound:
countries with nuclear weapons will move toward disarmament, countries without
nuclear weapons will not acquire them, and all countries can have access to nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. These three pillars--nonproliferation, disarmament,
and the peacefbl uses of nuclear energy--remain mutually reinforcing. Adherence
to and hll compliance with the NPT by all states would make a significant
contribution to reducing nuclear dangers. A global nonproliferation regime that is
strong and reliable serves as an essential foundation for efforts to reduce existing
nuclear arsenals to lower numbers leading to their eventual elimination. Without
this foundation, progress toward nuclear disarmament cannot be assured. And
without this foundation, the fullest possible access to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy will not be realized.
It is imperative, therefore, that all NPT Parties recommit themselves to
ensuring the health and vitality of this essential international agreement by
advancing each of the Treaty's three pillars together. The Treaty and the regime
cannot thrive unless each pillar thrives. All Parties must accept responsibility for
taking appropriate steps to contribute to the achievement of each of the Treaty's
fundamental objectives, whether collectively or individually. The Action Plan 
provides an achievable blueprint for advancing together each of the Treaty's
pillars, but it requires the involvement of all Parties.
A World without Nuclear Weapons: The U.S. Record
Three years ago in Prague, President Obama reaffirmed the U.S.
commitment to achieving a world free of nuclear weapons. He set out a
comprehensive disarmament and nonproliferation agenda to advance toward that
goal. President Obama reiterated that commitment and noted the progress on that
agenda when he said recently in Seoul,
"American leadership has been essential to progress in . . . taking concrete steps
towards a world without nuclear weapons. As a party to the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty, this is our obligation, and it's one that I take very
seriously. "
A world free of nuclear weapons requires both disarmament and
nonproliferation. The United States has made clear on many occasions that it
understands its special responsibility to take concrete steps towards a world
without nuclear weapons by pursuing nuclear disarmament. The United States
is making progress on disarmament, and we will detail those efforts this week. We
remain equally committed to doing our part to strengthen the nonproliferation
pillar of the NPT, and we will detail those efforts, as well as our commitment to
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the days ahead.
The Nonproliferation Challenge
All NPT Parties can and must contribute to the norm of nonproliferation
established by the NPT. The health of the entire regime depends on it. The
security of every state depends on it. 
The Action Plan's blueprint for bolstering nonproliferation is clear. There is
no greater threat to the integrity and vitality of the Treaty than the unresolved cases
of noncompliance. Because of the corrosive effect of noncompliance on
international confidence in the NPT, we must redouble our efforts to encourage full
compliance with Treaty obligations. It is the responsibility of all of us to make
clear that violating the NPT, and I would add, abusing the Treaty's withdrawal
provision, will have consequences. This cannot be a concern of merely one state
or a group of states.
Fundamental to bolstering nonproliferation is supporting the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the IAEA, and contributing to international efforts to
strengthen its ability to verify the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear materials and
technology. The importance of the Agency's role in NPT implementation cannot
be overstated. By providing credible assurances of states' compliance with their
nuclear nonproliferation obligations, IAEA safeguards build confidence among
neighbors and the international community at large. As agreed in the 2010 Action
Plan, NPT Parties should work together to ensure that the IAEA has the authority
and resources needed to fulfill its vital safeguards mission, including through the
broader implementation of the IAEA's Additional Protocol. The number of states
adhering to the Protocol is steadily increasing, with 14 states having brought it into
force since we met in 201 0. We welcome this important step by governments that
recognize the tremendous reinforcement it gives to the IAEA in fulfilling its
mission and the signal it sends to their neighbors about the peaceful nature of their
nuclear activities.
A strong and reliable nonproliferation regime makes it possible for NPT
Parties to continue to realize the promise of the Treaty's Article I\/ - international 
cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy - not only to generate power, but
to contribute to the welfare of our people in such diverse areas as human health,
water resources, agriculture, and food security. The United States takes great pride
in being the largest single contributor to these important programs. And we have
built on our traditional support by pledging an additional $50 million to the IAEA
Peacefbl Uses Initiative, which seeks to expand support for peaceful uses programs
by $100 million before the next Review Conference.
Some of the many side events scheduled for the PrepCom will allow us to
take advantage of our presence here in Vienna to share valuable information on the
Agency's diverse programs, including safeguards and cooperation on peaceful
nuclear applications. Such increased awareness among Parties can help reenergize
our governments, their Vienna missions, and the IAEA itself in our collective
efforts to implement many of the actions contained in the 2010 Final Document.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, let me close by reading a quote fiom President Obama's
message to the third Preparatory Committee meeting in 2009 that set the tone for
our work at the 20 10 Review Conference. He said,
"I recognize that differences are inevitable and that NPT Parties will not always
view each element of the treaty in the same way. But we must define ourselves
not by our differences, but by our readiness to pursue dialogue and hard work to
ensure the NPT continues to make an enduring contribution to international
peace and security. "
The United States recognizes there is no easy way forward. The agenda we
have endorsed will require hard work - political will is essential, but may not be 
enough. The United States remains committed to pursuing dialogue and to
working hard to find common ground so that all of us will be able to count on a
strong NPT as we continue our journey toward a world without nuclear weapons. 