Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Tiird Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference. My delegation associates itself with the statement made yesterday by the distinguished representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement State Parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
The Third Session of the NPT Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference takes place in the context of a new sense of opportunity for multilateral disarmament Viet Nam welcomes the joint statement made by the Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United States to negotiate a binding agreement to succeed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and to work towards fulfilling their commitments under Article VI of the NPT. Like others, we are also encouraged by the statement made by the United States President on April 4 in Prague that the United States would rededicate its efforts to work for a world free from nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
Viet Nam wishes to underline the imperative need to further strengthen the NPT in all its aspects. The NPT is a cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. Its three pillars, namely non-proliferation of nuclear weapons technology, nuclear disarmament and the
New York, 05 May 2009
peaceful use of nuclear energy, had clearly stipulated principles and objectives binding to all its Members towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
In the present context of stalled progress in the field of nuclear disarmament, due to the lack of full compliances by the nuclear weapons states (NWS) to accomplishing the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, in conformity with Article VI of the Treaty, we hold the view that the NPT States Parties at this Session should devote more efforts to review the Treaty's achievements and shortcomings, and find practical and appropriate measures to assure the full and non-selective implementation of the Treaty's provisions to submit the 2010 Review Conference. We are convinced that this would be the most effective way to enhance the NPT in all its aspects, thus contributing to the prevention of the vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons, achieving nuclear disarmament and promoting safety and security in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Nuclear weapons pose a permanent and serious threat to the survival of the humankind, and negatively affect global peace and security. Therefore, we remain convinced that the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is to get rid of these deadly weapons. We share serious concerns expressed by many delegations about the existence of thousands of nuclear weapons stockpiled and deployed in many parts of the world, many of them remaining on high-trigger alert for immediate use. To avoid a nuclear disaster, it is imperative to urgently find solutions leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Pending the complete nuclear disarmament, the NWS should bear their primary responsibility and obligation to undertake the 13 practical steps as agreed at the 2000 Review Conference to reduce and destroy their nuclear arsenals.
In this connection, my delegation hopes that the 2010 Review Conference should support the convening of the Fourth United Nations Special Session Devoted to Disarmament (SSOD IV) to identify effective ways and means to completely eliminate nuclear weapons. In the same vein, my delegation fully supports the establishment of a subsidiary body on nuclear disarmament in Main Committee I of the 2010 Review Conference, mandated to focus on the issue of fulfillment of the obligations under Arti cle
VI and to further practical measures required to achieve the goal of a v/orld free of nuclear weapons.
Despite the international community's efforts, today, in many parts of the world, there still exist approximately 30,000 nuclear warheads of which 12,000 are on high alert status. This puts the humankind under the direct and permanent threat of being exterminated by nuclear weapons. The NPT States Parties should agree upon recommendations to the 2010 Review Conference urging the NWS to take necessary measures to decrease the operational readiness of their nuclear weapons systems on one hand, and on the other hand, to pursue efforts towards the effective arrangements to assure the NNWS against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
My delegation reaffirms the importance of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament and reaffirms our consistent support for the efforts to bring this treaty into force without any further delay.
Viet Nam believes that the establishment of NWFZs in various regions of the world constitute positive steps to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation regimes in the respective regions, therefore contributing to enhancing regional and global peace and security. In this connection, my delegation welcomes the establishment of the Central Asian NWFZ that entered into force on March 21, 2009 and reaffirms our strong supports for the efforts to establish a NWFZ in the Middle East.
Mr. Chairman, I wish to conclude by expressing our firm commitment to working constructively with you and £.11 NPT States Parties for the success of this Session. We sincerely hope that this Session will live up its mandate and produce a report containing useful recommendations to pave the way for the 2010 Review Conference.
I thank you Mr. Chairman./.