Mr. Chairman,
It is my great pleasure on behalf of the Vietnamese Delegation to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2005 Review Conference of the State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). I am fully confident that with your diplomatic skills and wide experiences in the field of disarmament, you will guide the Session to a productive and satisfactory conclusion. Let me to assure you of my Delegation's support and full cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
The Vietnamese Delegation fully associates itself with the Statement made by the Head of Delegation of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT. I therefore limit myself to the following points.
Firstly, regarding the strengthening of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons which was concluded 34 years ago
and has been further strengthened by the 1995 and the 2000 Review Conferences, one should bear in mind that as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime, it covers both vertical and horizontal aspects of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The NPT implementation will not be complete if the efforts of the international community aim at only one or another aspect of the problem. All States Parties are obliged to live up to their commitments in implementing their obligations under the Treaty, the decisions and the resolutions of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference, especially the 13 practical steps laid down in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference. The strengthening of the NPT regime should be one of highest priority issues discussed at this Session as well as at the upcoming 2005 Review Conference.
Secondly, it is universally recognized that the NPT also constitutes the essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. The coming into existence of the NPT has been dictated by the final objective of achieving the total elimination of nuclear weapons. The nature of the relationship between the NPT and nuclear disarmament requires that the promotion of nuclear non-proliferation be undertaken hand in hand with corresponding progress towards nuclear disarmament. In the context of very slow progress toward nuclear disarmament in recent years, it has become more pertinent and justified that the nuclear weapon states should strictly undertake their obligations to stop the improvement, development, production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems, and as an interim measures, to de-alert and de-active them and gradually reduce them. Nuclear weapons states must fully implement the unequivocal undertakings they have given at the 2000 Review Conference to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to total nuclear disarmament. Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, efforts for the conclusion of a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear-weapons-states should be pursued as a matter of priority.
At the same time, the Vietnamese Delegation wishes to emphasize the legitimate right of all states parties to use nuci'ear
energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination, in conformity with Article VI of the Treaty.
Thirdly, nuclear weapons free zones not only make significant contribution toward achieving regional and international security, but also strengthen the NPT regime and the process of total nuclear disarmament. In this spirit, the Vietnamese Delegation wishes to reiterate its strong support for the nuclear weapons free zones established by the Treaties of Tiatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Plindaba, Mongolia's nuclear-weapons-free-status as well as efforts to implement the Resolution adopted by the 1995 Review Conference so that the Middle East will become a zone free of nuclear weapons. We welcome the accession by Cuba (2002) and Timor Leste (2003) to the NPT. At regional level, Viet Nam is working closely with other ASEAN member states to ensure Southeast Asia remains a region free from nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
Viet Nam attaches great importance to the work of the Preparatory Committee. We hope that the Preparatory Committee, building up on the deliberations and results of previous two sessions, will be able to produce a consensus report containing recommendations and finalize procedural arrangements for the upcoming 2005 NPT Review Conference. The Vietnamese Delegation is ready, during next two weeks, to work closely with other delegations to make the Third PrepCom Session a success.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.