

MR. PRESIDENT, 
Allow me to associate my delegation with the congratulations already addressed to you upon your election to this demanding post of the President of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. In view of your wealth of experience, we hope to work fruitfully and successfully under your guidance in search for mutually acceptable decisions on the complex issues of disarmament and international security. Needless to say, you can count on the Zimbabwe delegation for support in discharging your duties. 
It has been observed that there are some moments in life which mark the close of a period like boundary posts and at the same time point - in a new direction. Indeed, the 2000 Review Conference is one such moment. We are meeting at this conference not only to take stock of what has been achieved since the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995, but also to further strengthen the review process of the Treaty. 

Mr. President, 
Most delegations have submitted that the NPT is the cornerstone of the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament and that the 2000 Review Conference should strive to determine the continuing viability of the Treaty. But can we say that the "new world order" provides a framework for strengthening the review process in our endeavors to "promote the full implementation of the Treaty.?" 
With your indulgence, let me quote from Secretary General Kofi Annan's Report to the Millennium Assembly, "The objective of nuclear non-proliferation is not helped by the fact that the nuclear weapon states continue to insist that those weapons in their hands enhance security, while in the hands of others they are a threat to world peace. If we were making steady progress towards disarmament, this situation would be less alarming. Unfortunately the reverse is true. Not only are the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START) stalled, but there are no negotiations at all covering the many thousands of so-called tactical nuclear weapons in existence, or the weapons of any nuclear power other than those of the Russian Federation and the USA." 

Mr. President, 
Zimbabwe, a state-party to the NPT, is committed to the goal of global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. While it is not the intention of my delegation to remind this august body that the 1995 Review Conference indefinitely extend the Treaty and, not the right for nuclear weapon states to keep their arsenals forever, let me take this occasion to reiterate that the NPT places contractual obligations on both the nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states to make progress toward general and complete disarmament. Some nuclear weapon states recognize this and I wish to quote from the statement of H.E Mr. Li Changhe, Ambassador for Disarmament Affairs of the Peoples' Republic of China at the First Committee of the 53rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly on 14 October 1998. Mr. Changhe stated; "Complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons is the common aspiration of mankind. We fully understand the wish of the large number of non-nuclear-weapon states for general and complete nuclear disarmament. The indefinite extension of the NPT does not imply that the nuclear-weapon states can possess nuclear weapons forever. The nuclear-weapon states should intensify their efforts to fulfil the obligations contained in Article VI of the NPT." 

Mr. President, 
As long as there is an exclusive club which is reluctant to give up its nuclear option, there will always be an irresistible temptation on threshold nuclear powers to knock at the door and gain entry into that club. Indeed the Canberra Commission Report concluded that "the possession of nuclear weapons by any state is a constant stimulus to other states to acquire them.' 
There is no doubt that the 2000 NPT Review Conference is being held against a backdrop of an adverse trend in disarmament which we hope will not trigger a fresh nuclear arms race. Recent events that cast an ominous shadow on the disarmament agenda include: 
the failure by the US Senate to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, an action that negates the assurances delivered during the First Committee General Debate on 14 October 1998 by acting Under Secretary of State and Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Mr. Holum, when he declared, "Let me assure you, the United States remains committed to nuclear disarmament pursuant to NPT Article VI. 
Over the past decade the United States has eliminated more than 10 000 nuclear weapons from its military arsenal, along with more than 1700 missile launchers and bombers under the INF and START 1 Treaties. We have not conducted a nuclear weapon test explosion since 1992." 
the "new" Alliance Strategic Concept which in large part is a repetition of NATO's Cold War Strategic doctrine that states that in order for NATO to protect peace and to prevent war or any kind of coercion, the alliance would maintain an appropriate mix of nuclear and conventional forces based in Europe. The 1997 US Presidential Decision Directive 60 also states that nuclear weapons will remain the "cornerstone" of US security policy. This posture has undoubtedly partly influenced Russia to retract from its "no first use" commitment. 
the impasse on the Conference on Disarmament, the nuclear tests by India and Pakistan; and the challenges to the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM) and the intention of the US to deploy an anti missile defense system.
Mr. President, 
On the credit side, Zimbabwe lauds the recent ratification of START II and the CTBT by the Russian Duma and regards this action, an indication of Russia's "full commitment to its obligations under Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty" as declared last week by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, H.E. Mr. Igor S. Ivanov. While this ratification opens the way for the commencement of the START III negotiations, it will be also important to give due considerations to Russia's concerns vis a vis the challenges to the ABM Treaty. Foreign Minister Ivanov reminded us that further reductions in strategic offensive weapons could only be considered in the context of preservation of the ABM Treaty. According to the Russian Foreign Minister, "one has to be fully aware of the fact that the prevailing system of arms control agreements is a complex and quite fragile structure. Once one of its key elements has been weakened, the entire system is destabilized. And in the context of globalization, the interdependence of these elements has drastically increased. The collapse of the ABM Treaty would, therefore, undermine the entirety of disarmament agreements concluded over the last 30 years. The threat of the erosion of the non-proliferation regimes related to nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery means would therefore, grow." 
Mr. Ivanov's observation echoes Secretary General Kofi Annan's assertion that, "unless plans to deploy missile defenses are devised with the agreement of all concerned parties, the progress achieved thus far in reducing the number of nuclear weapons may be jeopardized. Confidence-building is required to reassure states that their nuclear deterrent capabilities will not be negated.' 

Mr. President, 
When I sojourned to New York for the Third NPT Prep.Com in May 1999, I informed the meeting that our experience in Geneva at the Conference on Disarmament had demonstrated the futility of engaging into negotiations without political will. I also observed that history had shown that bilateral agreements could easily be held hostage to national interests and I am glad to say that Secretary General Kofi Annan has vindicated us. In his address to the 2000 NPT, Review Conference Mr. Kofi Annan stated, "much of the established multilateral disarmament machinery has started to rust, a problem due not to the machinery itself but to the apparent lack of political will to use it." 
The Secretary General also showed the way forward - a resultsbased Treaty review process that focuses on specific benchmarks. One such benchmark would be the entry into force of the CTBT. The CTBT is not only a non-proliferation treaty that raises political and technical hurdles for any country designing nuclear weapons for the first time, but also a cornerstone of efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament. It is disheartening that some members of the P5 have chosen not to ratify the CTBT - an instrument that makes it possible for them to meet their disarmament obligations under Article VI of the NPT. 
Another benchmark would be the irreversible reduction in stocks of nuclear weapons, wherever they exist. Proposals by the New Agenda Coalition provide a route-map to this end. It will also be imperative for this Review Conference not only to consolidate existing nuclear weapon free zones but to negotiate the creation of new zones in regions where they do not exist. Another benchmark would be binding security guarantees to non-nuclear weapon States Parties. 
Nuclear Weapons States should be encouraged to formally recognize and affirm that the assurances of non-use against non-nuclear weapon states parties to the NPT and to regional nuclear weapon free-zone treaties are legally binding. It is also the considered view of my delegation that the determination of whether a state is in good standing under the NPT and regional treaties and protected by the assurances be a matter for the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) or other authoritative international body. 

Mr. President, 
In conclusion, my delegation would like to recognize those Nuclear Weapon States that have ratified the CTBT. We also urge the P5 to fulfil their Treaty obligations and to pursue and conclude negotiations aimed at the elimination of nuclear weapons. The International Court of Justice's 1996 Advisory Opinion unequivocally emphasizes the importance of honoring those obligations. This is no longer the time for "Do as I say, not as I do."
Thank you

