My delegation joins other delegations that have spoken before me, in congratulating you on your election as Chairman of the Third Preparatory Committee meeting for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. I am confident that under your able leadership, this meeting will significantly advance our collective endeavour to lay the groundwork for a successful Review Conference next year.
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered by Cuba and Nigeria on behalf of the Non - Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Africa Group respectively.
Mr. Chairman,
The challenges of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation continue to constitute the greatest threat to international peace and security. The lofty goals of achieving a nuclear weapon free world remain elusive with little progress registered by NPT State parties in realizing the commitments they made at the opening for signature of the NPT and the NPT Review Conferences. My delegation therefore believes that this current review cycle affords NPT State parties the opportunity to reaffirm their commitment to advancing and strengthening the Treaty.
Zimbabwe believes that the NPT remains the only cornerstone of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. The imperative need to reaffirm the importance of the NPT is thus a collective responsibility of both nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states. To this end, at the forthcoming Review Conference we must strive to adopt realistic measures that advance the goals of the NPT. Similarly, we must also focus on achieving the universality of the Treaty through addressing measures to persuade those countries not yet party to the NPT to do so.
My delegation also believes that in this review cycle, State parties must also focus on measures to advance in a balanced manner the NPT's three pillars namely nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mindful of the reality of unfulfilled commitments made by State parties at past Review Conferences pursuant to their obligations under Article VI of the Treaty, my delegation joins other delegations in welcoming the emerging positive indications of a renewed commitment in moving the disarmament process forward.
Pursuant to the recommendations of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conference my delegation urges that negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva should commence as soon as possible on modalities for an agreed programme of work on a verifiable Fissile material cut-off Treaty. We also support the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. To this end we call on countries in Annex II that are yet to ratify the treaty to do so to allow for its early entry into force.
Mr. Chairman,
With respect to nuclear-weapon-free zones, Zimbabwe believes that their establishment underpins international efforts to strengthen global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime as well as regional peace and security. Zimbabwe signed and ratified the Pelindaba Treaty that seeks to establish the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. My delegation calls on African countries that have not yet done so, to sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible. Similarly my delegation looks forward to the early establishment of a nuclear-weapons-free-zone in the Middle East, pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council and the 1995 NPT Review Conference. We also support on-going initiatives towards the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in other regions.
Zimbabwe believes there is a compelling need for all State parties to uphold and promote the provisions of Article IV of the Treaty that underpins their inalienable right to develop research, the production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful proposes within the parameters of articles I, II and III. The IAEA's technical cooperation and assistance has contributed significantly towards socio-economic development of mankind. We are therefore witnessing an increased demand particularly from developing countries for the applications of nuclear technology in inter alia human and livestock health, agriculture, energy and water management.
My delegation believes that the forthcoming 2010 Review Conference must address measures to strengthen the activities of the IAEA's technical cooperation programme including the provision of adequate financial resources. We also reaffirm the principle that the Agency's provision of technical cooperation and assistance should not be subject to political manipulation on account of reasons outside of the Treaty's objectives. To this end, State parties should endeavour at all times to resist any attempts to restrict the application of the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, under the guise of non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
On non-proliferation, my delegation wishes to reaffirm the critical role of the IAEA as the sole and competent authority tasked with responsibility to verify compliance with the safeguards regime. Zimbabwe believes that NPT state parties should honour their obligations under their respective safeguards Agreements whilst also supporting collective efforts to strengthen the IAEA's safeguards system as well as promoting its universality. Measures to enhance the effectiveness of the Agency and uphold its integrity and impartiality are critical to the effectiveness and integrity of the NPT.
In conclusion Mr. Chairman, my delegation hopes that our deliberations in this Preparatory Committee will lay the groundwork towards the successful conclusion of the Review Conference next year.
I thank you.