Permanent Mission of the Republic of Zimbabwe
to the United Nations
STATEMENT
BY
H. E. FREDERICK M. M. SHA V A
AMBASSADOR AND PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
ON
2015 NPT REVIEW CONFERECE
30 APRIL 2015
NEW YORK 
STATEMENT DELIVERED BY H.E. AMBASSADOR fREDERICK M. M.
SHAVA, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE Of ZIMBABWE TO THE
UNITED NATIONS, AT THE 2015 NPT REVIEW CONfERENCE, NEW
YORK, 27 APRIL - 22 MAY 2015
Allow me to express my delegation's warm congratulations to you, Your
Excellency, on your election to the PreSidency of the 2015 NPT Review
Conference and for the manner in which you are conducting the Conference
so far. My delegation assures you of our full cooperation and support as you
lead us through this challenging but extremely important conference. My
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered by the distinguished
Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the member
states of the Non Aligned Movement (NAM), and by the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria on behalf of the African Group.
May I take this opportunity to convey our sincere and heartfelt condolences
to the Government and People of Nepal on the tragic disaster that has
resulted in the loss of many lives and disrupted the lives of millions. Our
thoughts and prayers, support and solidarity are with you at this difficult
time.
Madame President;
Zimbabwe attaches great value to the urgent need for the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, which we believe must remain the highest priority of the
NPT. We strongly believe that the NPT provides a solid basis upon which all
countries (State Parties and non State Parties) should seek to eliminate the
deadly weapon from the face of the earth. In this regard, Zimbabwe
underscores the importance of political will to achieve the objective of total
nuclear disarmament. It is our view that the 2015 NPT Review Conference
can only register success if all of us gathered here today demonstrate
goodwill, without which this Review Conference will amount to mere rhetoric.
Indeed, this Review Conference should honestly interrogate, the progress or
lack thereof, made so far towards the implementation of the Treaty since
its inception 45 years ago. Particular focus must be directed towards
assessing how we have fared with regards to the targets we set ourselves
for during the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
2 
Madame President;
Zimbabwe recognizes the importance of simultaneously pursuing the three
mutually reinforcing fundamental pillars of the NPT; ie nuclear disarmament;
non proliferation and peaceful useS of nuclear energy. We, nevertheless,
stress that dismantling of the weapons must remain our primary concern for
it is our firm belief that without these weapons, there will be no
proliferation, or threat of their use. In this regard, Zimbabwe urges the
Nuclear Weapons States (NWS) to honestly fulfill their legal obligations
under Article VI of the Treaty. The NWS must also be seen to be providing
leadership towards the objective of total elimination of nuclear weapons,
particularly by demonstrating transparency, irreversibility and international
verifiability of their practical measures as they fulfill their legal obligations.
Madame President;
Zimbabwe recognizes the nuclear reductions that have taken place so for
and applauds NWS that have continued to pursue such reductions. We stress
that such reductions should not be construed for urgent total elimination of
the weapons. Zimbabwe is gravely concerned over the reported
modernization of the existing nuclear weapons. No modernization of such
weapons of mass destruction will make them safe and secure. Rather, we
view the modernization as a way of sharpening the weapon's destructive
capabilities.
While we believe that the greatest responsibility for nuclear disarmament
lies with NWS, as recognized by the Treaty, we also believe that states that
possess the weapons but are not part to the NPT have an equally important
role in the pursuit for a world without nuclear weapons. It is therefore,
imperative in our view, to engage in candid honest dialogue with those states
in a bid to bring them on board. While we continue to call on those who are
outside the NPT to join the Treaty as non nuclear weapon states, it is our
belief that we should also be pragmatic and realistic going forward. Whether
nuclear weapons are possessed by State Parties to the NPT or by those
outside, these weapons remain a danger to human kind. We view the
indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 not as a sign of success, but as a
warning that the world is increasingly sliding into the danger zone.
3 
Madame President;
Before total elimination of nuclear weapons, NWS must continue to provide
concrete legally binding security assurances particularly to non nuclear
weapons states. We also believe that efforts must be strengthened in
pursuit of a Nuclear Weapons Convention (NWC), one that will outlaw the
possession of these deadly weapons. Such a convention would undoubtedly
increase pressure for the dismantling of existing nuclear arsenal. In the
same light, we also believe that the immediate entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) will enhance confidence
among states. The ratification of the CTBT by Annex II States must be a
priority we should continue to pursue.
Madame President, Zimbabwe fully subscribes to the NAM position which
recognizes the inalienable right of all states to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. In this regard, we call upon the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) to ensure transparency and fairness as it considers various cases
across the globe. As the chief nuclear watchdog, the IAEA must never be
seen to be biased towards some, while seemingly being lenient or
demonstrating reluctance to rein in others. The agency must work to gain
the confidence of all Member States to effectively undertake its important
work.
We welcome the recently concluded framework of a comprehensive
agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme under the E3+3 negotiations.
Equally, the creation of zones free from nuclear weapons must remain a top
priority of the NPT in order to act as a confidence building measure toward
total elimination of the weapons. We are happy that as a region we have
taken the bold step to establish a nuclear weapon free zone under the
Pelindaba Treaty signed in Cairo on 11 April 1996 which entered into force on
15 July 2009. This Treaty for which the Chair of the African Union
Commission is the depository prohibits the development, manufacture,
stockpiling, acquisition testing, possession, control or stationing of nuclear
explosive devices and the dumping of nuclear waste in the territory of state
parties nor to assist or encourage such activities. It also prohibits any
attack against nuclear installations in the zone by the State Parties and
requires them to maintain the highest standards of physical protection of
nuclear material facilities and equipment which are to be used exclusively
4 
for peaceful purposes in compliance with the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards. Zimbabwe, thus calls for focused and serious discussions
to allow the holding of a conference on a zone free of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East.
Madame President;
Let me conclude by applauding all those who are honestly working towards
realistic, verifiable, transparent and sustainable nuclear disarmament. We,
nevertheless, note that the current international system is riddled with
growing tensions, particularly major power rivalries. We therefore urge the
world's most powerful countries to engage in honest political dialogue aimed
at eliminating the growing tensions and lay the ground for the pacific
resolution of disputes. Only when there is mutual trust and confidence in one
another can there be meaningful and realistic efforts towards nuclear
disarmament.
I thank you, Madame President and wish you success!!!
5 