Mr. Chairman ....Greetings
Argentina assigns great importance to the inalienable right of the Parties to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. This is known as the "third ^ pillar" of the NPT, and is a right that predated the NPT and that can therefore, only be modified or restricted by express agreement between the parties. Cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy has been a vital part of the agreement that led to the adoption of the NPT and the decision by the vast majority of members of the Treaty to renounce nuclear weapons.
Any attempt to redefine the delicate balance of obligations contained in the NPT, to question its usefulness and relevance, or even to cast doubt on the rights of states to technological developments for exclusively peaceful purposes, could undermine the system put in place by the treaty and which has won generalized acceptance.
Argentine is proud of its long tradition and experience both as a recipient country and as an exporter of nuclear materials and technology. Based on that fact, Argentina encourages the adoption of actions -both in this forum and within the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)- in favour of guaranteeing the exchange of materials, equipment and technology destined to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, but always with a clear focus on sustainable economic development. The IAEA has special responsibilities in the promotion of technical cooperation -as well as in safeguards and nuclear security- for which it needs an assignation of human and financial resources reflecting an adequate balance between the promotional and regulatory activities of the agency.
Argentina has given sustained support to the training activities and to the missions of experts coordinated by the IAEA, to which it owes; the policy of active participation in human resources that has allowed Argentine experts to be sent to other countries with realities and needs very similar to our own.
Due to the serious non-proliferation crisis that has afflicted us in recent years, the scope of article 4 of the NPT is now under review. Proposals have been made, particularly in reference to restricting the fuel cycle, which affect the essence of article 4 and the concept of the "inalienable" right of States to make peaceful use of nuclear energy.
In consequence, Argentina is convinced that in order to attain the objectives of non- proliferation, the elements existing in the international regime specifically designed to that end should be applied.
Mindful of the possibility that the system may be open to abuse by those wishing to secure the benefits of technological development designed for military applications, Argentina believes it convenient to evaluate new measures that contemplate an immediate suspension of nuclear cooperation in cases of proven noncompliance with non-proliferation commitments.
Nuclear activities for peaceful purposes mist be carried out on the basis of transparency and compliance with internationally accepted standards in questions of nuclear security and physical protection of nuclear materials.
Argentina is convinced of the importance of international cooperation in strengthening nuclear security, the safe handling of nuclear waste and radiological protection, and therefore urges those states that have still not done so to ratify all the pertinent conventions on the matter at the earliest opportunity, and that there should be no delay in implementing their commitments.
For that reason, Argentina looks forward to a prompt conclusion to the review process and the consequent adoption of amendments to the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials (CPPNM).
As a country that combines a long tradition in nuclear matters and a vast maritime front, Argentina considers it a priority that the international community contribute to the consolidation of an effective global regime of nuclear transport on objective responsibility. In this regard, Argentina especially values the intervention of the IAEEA in seeking to strengthen the current regime on responsibility, favouring adhesion to it and facilitating its application at international level and domestically within.
Likewise, Argentina actively supports the proposed amendments to the Rome Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (1988), which are currently the subject of negotiations in the International Maritime Organization (IMO), which seek to review the international regulations on physical security in navigation, with a view to updating them in light of the threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and international terrorism.
Argentina is an active member of all export control regimes. It should be emphasized here that the directives of the nuclear export control regimes were laid down to ensure that nuclear energy is used only for peaceful purposes. The activities designed to bestow greater transparency on nuclear export controls allow directives such as the presentation of the complete report on the activities of the Zangger Group to be identified simply as a declaration and exercise of responsible policies in matters of nuclear exports and not as limitations on legitimate access to nuclear energy, the reason for Argentina's participation in such regimes.
Therefore, the adoption of Resolution 1540 by the Security Council last year is a significant contribution to the cause of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the fight against terrorism. Fortunately, Resolution 1540 universalizes measures such as export control systems, which Argentina implements in line with the policy of active participation in non-proliferation regimes.
Argentina is convinced that, in a context of transparency and trust, the activities of all Member States which rely, to a greater or lesser extent, on peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a framework of sustainable development as a means of guaranteeing progress and social welfare for all their citizens, w II be strengthened and reaffirmed. Argentina is deeply committed to ensuring a balanced focus in the work of this Committee that will allow the provisions of article 4 to be fully safeguarded.
Thank-you, Mr. Chairman.
