AUSTRALIA
2017 NPT Cluster III Debate (Peaceful Uses)
Mr Chair
There could be no better place for us to reflect upon the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
under the NPT than here in Vienna.
The NPT has provided the framework that allows for the manifold benefits of nuclear energy
to be shared and multiplied. For almost five decades, the Treaty has underpinned global
peace and security. Its interlinked rights and obligations have allowed for the use of nuclear
science and technology to flourish while proliferation risks are managed.
States Party to the NPT continue to harness the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in almost
every aspect of human endeavour. Whether it be to combat drought and disease, or to
improve health and agriculture, the benefits of nuclear science and technology have been
amply demonstrated in practice.
Australia upholds the rights of all NPT States party to develop, research, produce and use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, as set out in Article IV of the Treaty, consistent with
Articles I, II and III.
Mr Chair
Australia was among the first States advocating for the creation of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, to allow for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while safeguarding against
nuclear proliferation. The IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Program is the prime vehicle for
international cooperation to share the benefits of nuclear science and technology.
As a member of the IAEA Board of Governors and an active Member State, Australia is a
staunch supporter of the TC program. We pay our target contributions in full and on time.
We have also made voluntary contributions to the Peaceful Uses Initiative, including a
contribution of EUR 600,000 to the ReNuAL project to modernise the IAEA’s nuclear
applications laboratories.
We participate in many activities conducted under the TC program, including through the
Regional Cooperative Agreement for the Asia Pacific (RCA), which has been in operation
since the 1970’s. In the last twelve months, we have provided funding and in-kind support
with a particular focus on Small Island Developing States.
As a major supplier of uranium and a country with a significant scientific base, Australia
supports the further expansion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, under conditions where
the highest standards of safety and security are observed. We are pleased to note the

significant advances made by the international community to enhance safety and security,
since the last Vienna PrepCom in 2012.
Among these we can count the completion of the 2011 Action Plan on Nuclear Safety,
through which the Member States of the Agency committed themselves afresh to the
enhancement of nuclear safety. 2016 also saw the entry into force of the amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. Participation at the recent
Review Meeting of the Convention on Nuclear Safety was unprecedented. On the security
front, high-level attention continues, including through the IAEA Ministerial Conference in
2016.
For Australia’s part, our excellent safety and security record attests to our dedicated efforts.
We continue to fulfil our obligations under the various international conventions to which we
are committed. We apply the IAEA’s safety and security guidance, and regularly invite the
IAEA to conduct peer reviews. In 2017-18 we will host our next International Physical
Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS) mission and our second full-scope Integrated
Regulatory Review Service (IRRS) mission.
Australia is also actively involved in developing and sharing the uses of nuclear science and
technology. A prime example of this is the increasing role we are taking in the low-enriched
uranium (LEU) production of molybdenum-99. When it commences operation later in 2017,
Australia will be able to supply approximately 25 per cent of world need for molybdenum99.
Australia’s leadership in LEU produced nuclear medicine further reinforces that this
technology is technically and economically feasible and available now. We encourage those
Member States using highly-enriched uranium for the production of nuclear medicine to
convert to LEU-based production to further reduce proliferation and security risks.
Australia is also developing its indigenous waste form technology, Synroc, with construction
of the first industrial-scale facility based on this technology due to start next year. Synroc
has many advantages over traditional radioactive waste forms including greater volume
reduction, increased durability, and greater flexibility to treat intractable waste streams.
Mr Chair
As the international community embarks on this NPT review cycle, we need to take a
pragmatic, forward-looking approach, and to continue our work on the basis of the Action
Plan agreed at the 2010RevCon. Australia was proud to have Chaired Main Committee
Three at the 2015 NPT RevCon and looks forward to progressing all three pillars of the NPT
with a view to a successful outcome at the 2020 Review Conference.

