Statement for Cluster III (Peaceful uses of
nuclear energy)
Second Preparatory Committee for the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT)
Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018

Mr Chairman
The NPT underpins realisation of the vast and
diverse benefits of nuclear energy. It ensures
benefits can be developed and shared among
States to the betterment of humanity, and for
social and economic development. The links to no
fewer than nine of the seventeen Sustainable
Development Goals attest to the critical role that
peaceful uses of nuclear energy have in taking
forward development outcomes.
Today the benefits of the peaceful use and
application of nuclear energy are enjoyed across
almost every aspect of human endeavour –
1

including through practical contributions to
combatting drought and disease, improving
human and animal health and agricultural
outcomes.

Mr Chairman
Australia remains steadfast in our view that all
NPT States party have an inalienable right to
develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy
as set out in Article IV of the Treaty and in keeping
with Articles I, II, and III.
Australia, as a founding member of the IAEA, has
been a strong supporter of the Agency’s essential
role including through the Technical Cooperation
Program to facilitate collaboration between States,
in order to harness the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy while simultaneously safeguarding against
nuclear proliferation.
Australia welcomes the continued high level
attention on nuclear applications including
through the forthcoming IAEA Ministerial
Conference scheduled for November this year
(2018).

2

In keeping with our strong commitment to the
objectives of the TC program, Australia takes pride
in the fact we pay our target contributions in full
and on time. As a friend of ReNuAL, Australia has
also made voluntary contributions totalling
€600,000 in recent years, through the Peaceful
Uses Initiative, to support modernisation of the
IAEA’s nuclear applications laboratories.

Mr Chairman
The entry into force in June last year (2017) of an
indefinite extension to the Regional Cooperative
Agreement (RCA) between 22 Member States in the
Asia-Pacific region, including Australia, reflects
this agreement’s longstanding success - since the
1970s - in underpinning regional cooperation in
nuclear science and technology in Australia’s most
immediate region.
As a country with a significant nuclear science
base and as a major supplier of uranium for
peaceful purposes, Australia supports the further
expansion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy,

3

under conditions where the highest standards of
safeguards, safety and security are observed.
We also welcome the IAEA’s development of
instruments, standards and codes of conduct,
which are key mechanisms through which to
engage the peaceful application of nuclear energy
and techniques while ensuring human safety and
security and environmental protection.

Mr Chairman
Australia is proud of its excellent safety and
security record, which attests to our dedicated
efforts to live by the standards set by the
international community - including through
adherence to the various international conventions
to which we are party. We apply the IAEA’s safety
and security standards and welcome regular peer
review by the IAEA in a spirit of transparency and
continual improvement.
In 2017 Australia hosted an International Physical
Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS) follow up
mission, and work is well underway in advance of
our second full-scope Integrated Regulatory Review

4

Service (IRRS) mission, which will take place in
early November this year.
Australia, as a contracting party to the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive
Waste Management, is working hard with other
Contracting Parties ahead of the 6th Review
Meeting from 21 May to 1 June to review national
reports. We are also actively participating in the
preparations for the 2018 HEU Minimisation
Symposium in June, which will highlight
successful reactor conversions, HEU removal
activities and production of medical isotopes by
non-HEU methods, and provide an opportunity for
States to actively consider minimising remaining
stocks and use of highly enriched uranium.
Since 2006, Australia has demonstrated that
molybdenum-99 production from low enriched
uranium targets irradiated in a low enriched
uranium-fuelled reactor is a real and practical
alternative to highly enriched uranium-based
production. Australia has recently constructed the
ANSTO Nuclear Medicine Facility, which will have
the capacity to supply up to 25 per cent of global
needs for this vital diagnostic tool.
5

In line with the international objective of
minimising and eventually eliminating the use of
HEU in civil commerce, Australia’s leadership in
LEU-produced nuclear medicine demonstrates
that this technology is already economically and
technically feasible.
Australia is also developing its own waste form
technology – Synroc, which will deliver benefits
over traditional radioactive waste forms, including
in terms of improved volume reduction, durability
and flexibility when treating intractable waste
streams. Construction of the first industrial-scale
facility using this technology will begin soon.

Mr Chairman
The peaceful development, research, production
and use of nuclear energy has delivered and is
delivering many significant gains to the benefit and
advancement of human endeavour and should
continue to be advanced and supported in keeping
with a strong safety and security culture and
based on principles of non-proliferation.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

6

