According to its Article IV, nothing in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the States Party to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, II and III of the Treaty. Austria recognises that this right constitutes one of the fundamental elements of the Treaty.
But having a right also gives the owner of that right the freedom of choice how to use it. And every NPT State may decide in the interest of national, regional, and international security to use that right exclusively together with other states or through an international organisation. In this context, Austria in 2007 has offered food for thought for the revisited debate on the multilateralization of the nuclear fuel cycle: We believe that it is time to design a framework suited to the nuclear realities of the 21st century which restricts the most dangerous technologies, enrichment and reprocessing, exclusively to facilities under multilateral control. These limitations would need to be accompanied by proper rules of transparency and by an assurance that supplies would be available for legitimate uses.
In the last couple of years there has been considerable interest in the idea of creating such a new framework. The IAEA and several States, especially suppliers, have proposed a variety of interesting approaches, some focusing on the establishment of facilities under international control, others on guarantee-mechanisms to assure the supply of nuclear fuel.
We believe an initial step could be to entrust the IAEA to serve as a virtual broker for all transactions in the civilian nuclear fuel cycle. Every buyer -even if located next door to the seller must buy fuel through the IAEA. This would provide immediate transparency about who buys what. And that would hopefully contribute to more trust and confidence among nations. Gradually, the achieved transparency would be supplemented with control rights of the agency over the users of sensitive technology, in particular enrichment and reprocessing facilities. !n 'he ;ong term, increasing these control ngnts snouid transform -ail enricnment ana reorocessma facilities
from national to essentially multilateral operations under the auspices of the IAEA. It goes without saying that any new facilities would, right from the beginning, be multilateral IAEA-controlled operations.
Considerable advantages - in safety, security, non-proliferation and in cost - could accrue. A joint facility places all participants under a greater degree of scrutiny, which strengthens non-proliferation and security. A "breakout" by the host would be more difficult than in the case of a nationally controlled entity. Most of all, new facilities would only have to be built for economic reasons, not for reasons of strategic politics or national pride. As a consequence there would be fewer facilities - just as many as the market requires. Having fewer sites to watch means, in turn, that with a given amount of resources the IAEA is in a position to monitor more carefully.
Mr. Chairman,
There could be concern that by ceding control, the companies operating the facilities would be de facto nationalized and the huge investments into the technology would be lost. This is not the case. The companies would continue to run the facilities, they would continue to reap the profits, and they would remain the sole proprietors of the rights to their technology. The IAEA would simply take on the tasks currently exercised by states or transnational organizations - to monitor operations and to ensure that buyers fulfill non-proliferation requirements. But through the IAEA we would be doing that job, monitoring and verification, together.
There could be also concern that multilateralization could undermine countries' access to the peaceful use of nuclear energy - which is, after all, a right enshrined in Article IV of the NPT. That concern also is not justified. All States would fully maintain their NPT-rights. By entrusting the IAEA to control the facilities, we are in fact making joint use of our right and benefiting from the peaceful use of nuclear technology together in a fair and equal manner.
It is important to understand that the Austrian proposal precisely tries to counter any division into haves and have-nots regarding civilian nuclear technology. The confidence crisis about the use of this technology can only be overcome by establishing an international system that is fair and treats ail states In an equal manner. This goal can be achieved by an arrangement wherein al] states agree net to cperate enrichment and
reprocessing facilities individually and to transform all existing facilities into multilateral ones under the control and supervision of the IAEA.
Thank you.