2013 session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster III Statement by Ambassador Peter Woolcott
Australian Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Geneva
and Ambassador for Disarmament
30 April 2013
Mr Chairman,
Australia supports States’ rights to develop nuclear energy for peaceful uses, within a
framework that reduces the risk of proliferation, adheres to the highest international
standards for nuclear safeguards, security and safety, and provides the international
community with confidence about those activities’ exclusively peaceful nature.
Australia is a major supplier of uranium to many of the world’s nuclear power and
research reactors, a party to numerous bilateral agreements on nuclear cooperation, a
party to relevant IAEA Conventions on Security and Safety in accordance with Action
59, and maintains a competitive and ambitious scientific nuclear research program.
In this context, Australia takes very seriously the obligations placed upon us by the
NPT and we continue to urge others to fully meet their obligations – including
through the full implementation of the 2010 Action Plan – in order to fully enjoy the
benefits of being a State party to the NPT.
Mr Chairman,
This year, the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO)
celebrates 60 years of delivering benefits and innovation to health care, the
environment, agriculture, mining, manufacturing and construction through the
application of nuclear techniques. The OPAL reactor in Sydney is the only major
contributor to the worldwide supply of radiopharmaceuticals which uses only low
enriched uranium (LEU) targets and fuel. In the coming years, this contribution will
be bolstered by the construction of a new radiopharmaceutical manufacturing facility
at ANSTO with significantly increased production capacity, to enhance the security of
global supply of medical radioisotopes into the future.
Australia encourages the remaining research reactors using Highly Enriched Uranium
(HEU) to move to LEU fuel in accordance with Action 61. We would like to
congratulate the IAEA and the Czech Republic on the recent announcement of their
successful efforts to remove all HEU fuel from the Czech Republic, and urge other
States with HEU fuel to follow the Czech Republic’s example.

Mr Chairman,
The IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF) provides much needed funding to
support one of the three pillars of the NPT, namely the dissemination of the benefits
of the peaceful use of nuclear science and technology.
Australia is among the top contributors to the TCF and calls on all States to pay their
assessed contributions to the Fund in full and on time to help enhance the
effectiveness of the TCF, consistent with Action 52. In line with Action 55, Australia
is also pleased to make extra-budgetary contributions through the Peaceful Uses
Initiative (PUI) to two on-going projects on ocean acidification and marine coastal
environment pollution. The PUI is a creative method of funding important initiatives,
which supports the TCF in providing access to the benefits of nuclear energy.
Mr Chairman,
Australia reaffirms that the right of States parties to pursue peaceful nuclear energy is
dependent on their adherence to non-proliferation and safeguards obligations. This
qualification has been continually reaffirmed by NPT States parties including in the
2010 RevCon Final Document. Full compliance with the Treaty’s non-proliferation
and verification requirements under Articles I, II, and III underpins the right of States
Parties to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Australia is cognisant of the issues relating to the security of supply of nuclear fuel.
We believe that a well-functioning market provides the best assurance of supply for
all States, and mitigates the need to develop costly indigenous enrichment or
reprocessing programs in order to exercise their Article IV rights. Australia continues
to support IAEA Board of Governors resolutions establishing multilateral approaches
to the fuel cycle in line with Action 58. These approaches provide a welcome
platform to prevent the proliferation of sensitive nuclear technologies.
Mr Chairman,
With the lessons of the Fukushima accident still fresh, nuclear safety must remain a
priority for all States. Australia continues to promote the implementation of best
practice in nuclear safety. We continue to urge all States to apply, in a substantive
way, IAEA Safety Standards, to utilise IAEA peer review services on a regular basis
and publish mission reports, and to actively participate in peer review processes
conducted under the Safety Conventions.
Australia looks forward to the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit in the Netherlands. We
believe the Nuclear Security Summits have been highly beneficial in highlighting the
security of nuclear materials as a priority worldwide. The acquisition of nuclear
material by a terrorist group would be to the detriment of the security of all States and
their citizens. We believe the creation of an empowered and enduring nuclear security
regime beyond the summit process will be beneficial to the security of nations and
peoples worldwide. We urge all States to ratify the International Convention of the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism in line with Action 45 and the Amendment

to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material in line with Action
42.
Reaffirming Australia’s commitment to the principles of nuclear security and nonproliferation as expressed in the 2010 Action Plan, in 2013, Australia will host an
International Physical Protection Advisory Service mission, in order to ensure that its
facilities continue to comply with internationally recognised best practice.
Mr Chairman,
All States parties have the right to research, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. However, this right is coupled with obligations which must be
adhered to in order to enjoy the benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear technology.
The three pillars of the NPT – non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses – are
inseparably interrelated. The 2010 Action Plan provides a solid foundation of action
which will guide the development of the NPT across all three pillars. As we build to
the 2015 RevCon, Australia urges all States parties to work together to fully
implement the 2010 Action Plan.
I thank you, Mr Chairman.

