AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA
Australian Mission to the United Nations

E-mail australia@un.int

150 East 42nd Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.australia-unsc.gov.au

THE NINTH REVIEW OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
4 May 2015

Main Committee III
Statement by Mr. Richard Mathews
Director Nuclear Policy
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(Check against delivery)

Mr Chairman,

We would like to congratulate you on your election as Chair of Main
Committee III.

In the 45 years since it entered into force the NPT has underpinned global
cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and performed a critical
role in the maintenance of international peace and security. The NPT has
helped prevent proliferation while enabling the use and transfer of nuclear
science and technology, thus contributing to global economic development.

-2-

We look forward to constructive deliberations in this committee. We should
assess the implementation of the 18 pillar three action items from the 2010
Action Plan and look at which of these need to be reaffirmed and
strengthened, and whether there are areas not covered in 2010 which warrant
attention in the years ahead.

In the last five years, there has been solid progress on nuclear safety
following the Fukushima-Daiichi accident, and an increased high-level focus
on nuclear security.

We have also seen a growing recognition of the

essential role nuclear applications play in areas such as human health, water
management, agriculture and environmental protection.

The IAEA has

assisted 140 Member States in these areas, demonstrating that the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology benefits many people around the world.

Mr Chairman

Australia acknowledges the right of all States party to develop, research,
produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination
and in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT. States may choose
individually not to exercise all their rights, or to exercise those rights
collectively.

In accordance with Article IV.2, we support international

cooperation to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of equipment,
materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. Science and technology, including nuclear technology,
are an indispensable element of achieving development goals. We thus
recognise the particular importance of peaceful nuclear energy to developing
countries and encourage relevant IAEA programs to focus on those needs.

-3-

Almost sixty years ago, Australia was one of eight countries that envisaged
the formation of the IAEA to allow for the peaceful uses of the atom while
safeguarding against nuclear proliferation.

Australia remains a staunch

supporter of the invaluable work of the IAEA and its Technical Cooperation
Programme. Australia will continue to contribute to this Programme by
paying our target share in full and on time. We urge others in a position to
do so to ensure the Agency has the resources it needs, consistent with
Actions 52-55 of the Action Plan.

In this regard, we announced in our national statement in Plenary that
Australia will contribute a further 350,000 Euro to the Peaceful Uses
Initiative, including 250,000 Euros for the revitalisation of the Seibersdorf
Laboratories under the ReNuAL project. The remaining 100,000 Euros will
go towards PUI projects in the Asia-Pacific. These voluntary contributions
supplement our long-standing financial and in-kind support to the Regional
Cooperation Agreement, in which we have participated since the 1970s.

Mr Chairman

As endorsed in Action 57 of the 2010 Action Plan, nuclear safety and
security are of the highest priority for all States, and at all stages of the fuel
cycle. Australia urges all States to take advantage of the guidance offered
by the IAEA through its Standards and Nuclear Security Series documents,
and its many peer review services.

-4-

We also underscore the importance of the Convention on Nuclear Safety
(CNS), and urge all countries with nuclear power programmes, to report
regularly and fully. The peer review process remains an important part of
the CNS.
We also applaud the IAEA’s work on nuclear security, and look forward to
the International Conference on Nuclear Security to be held in December
2016. We welcome the contribution of the Nuclear Security Summit process
to promote action and cooperation at the highest levels.

Mr Chairman

Australia continues to play its part, as a major and responsible uranium
supplier. Through our nuclear cooperation agreements we work to ensure
the widest application of IAEA safeguards and the highest standards of
safety and security.

Australia is a leader in the use of LEU fuel and targets for medical isotope
production. We expect our production of molybdenum-99 will enable us to
meet over 20 per cent of world demand by 2016. LEU technology is a
viable pathway for the production of molybdenum-99, and a pathway that
also reduces proliferation risk. We encourage States using highly enriched
uranium to move to LEU, in line with Action 61.

Given the significance of potential withdrawal from the Treaty, we urge
agreement on a set of principles governing the exercise of the right to
withdraw under Article X (ten). While this has impact on the work of all
three Main Committees, it falls to us to consider it here.

-5-

Main Committee III will also take the lead on deliberations to strengthen the
NPT review process.

Australia of course strongly supports, and commends to other delegations,
the working papers submitted by the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative and the Vienna Group of Ten in their treatment of Main
Committee III issues.

We trust these papers will serve to facilitate

discussion and provide direction for our work over the coming five year
period. Thank you.

Thank you Mr Chairman.

