check against delivery

First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
30 April - 11 May 2012
Cluster Ill
Delegation of Austria
Statement by Mr Volker Holubetz
9 May 2012

Mr. Chairman,
The European Union has delivered statements, including on cluster III,
which the Austrian delegation fully supports. In addition, the European
Union has elaborated a working paper explaining the implementation of
the 2010 NPT Review Conference conclusions and recommendations for
follow-on action as well as a working paper on peaceful uses of nuclear
technology regarding EU support for the safety, security and safeguards
activities of the IAEA and countries that chose to engage in nuclear
technologies in peaceful uses. Let me also add the traditional Working
Papers of the Vienna Group of 10 on cooperation in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and on nuclear safety.

In the Austrian general statement that was held by the Secretary General
for foreign affairs, the special position of Austria regarding nuclear power
was high-lighted. At this juncture, I would like to reiterate that Austria like all other States Party to the NPT - is exercising the inalienable right

under Article IV to develop research, production and use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with Articles I and II of the
NPT. This right also entails the option NOT to use nuclear power however, without outright renouncing the right recognised in the NPT to
do so, As past accidents have shown, nuclear power can never be 100%
safe. Furthermore, given the long-term effects and responsibilities
connected to the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear power does not contribute to
sustainable development. Indeed, it poses an additional risk in times of
natural or man-made crises. And finally, given the combination of safety,
security and proliferation concerns, nuclear power is not a viable avenue
to confront other global challenges such as climate change.

The IAEA, in our view, is the major player to guarantee, that countries
choosing to develop their capacities in the peaceful applications of
nuclear energy do so under the best safety, security and nonproliferation conditions. Thus Austria is a strong supporter of the IAEA
and traditional partner in various training activities to this end. Austria
also fully supports the principle enshrined in Article IV para. 2. Even in
times of economic and budgetary constraint, Austria has made extra
efforts to pay its assessed contributions to the IAEA regular budget and
the Technical Cooperation Fund in full and on time. In addition to the

regular assessed contributions, Austria is making further contributions
towards the construction and maintenance of IAEA office infrastructure.

Mr. Chairman,

The NPT is a comprehensive Treaty dealing with the three pillars
disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses. All three pillars are
interconnected. Against this background, Austria has been co-sponsor of
working papers on all three pillars. Let me point out two of these working
papers and demonstrate their relevance for all three pillars:

1) The Norwegian delegation has already outlined the Working Paper on

the second International Symposium on the Minimization of Highly
Enriched Uranium, which we had submitted in relation to action 61 of the
Action Plan. There were a number of policy ideas and recommendations
that the symposium co-hosts Austria, Norway and the Nuclear Threat
Initiative identified as a possible policy agenda for the future. They aim to
promote tangible progress, as well as a culture of transparency, trust and
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy that also ensures the
highest level of safety, security and non-proliferation. They concern the
minimization of highly enriched uranium, civilian naval propulsion
reactors, transparency as well as a few ideas concerning the expansion

of efforts in these fields. Delegations to this NPT Preparatory Committee
meeting are invited to take note of the second International Symposium
on the minimisation of highly enriched uranium, and of the policy ideas
that were generated for future consideration.
2) Together with Japan, Austria submitted a working paper on

disarmament education. It was triggered by the Critical lssues Forum for
high-school students, and focused on nuclear safety and security. It was
organised by the James Martin Center for Non-Proliferation Studies
together with the Vienna Center for Disarmament and Non Proliferation.
The Critical Issues Forum demonstrated the comprehensive approach
we need to take on critical issues such as the nuclear question: the
"nuclear Jinnih" is out of its bottle, nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation as well as the safety and security of nuclear energy in its
peaceful applications have to be considered together. Transparent
discussions need to take place not only among the "nuclear elites". This
is a question of public concern and of mutual trust. It is a question of
peace and a sustainable future.
In that sense, Austria, as part of the European Union as well as in its
national capacity, has made efforts in accordance with its constitution to
support and to diligently implement the actions in the peaceful uses
cluster, i.e. actions 47 to 64 of the action plan. The Austrian position
regarding the full multilateralisation of the complete nuclear fuel cycle

remains the ideal that we would want to pursue in future discussions and
also offer in regional contexts.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to conclude the Austrian intervention by noting that the NPT

Preparatory Committee is clearly profiting from the proximity of the
Vienna-based organisations IAEA, CTBTO, and the UNODA Vienna
Office. They provide an opportunity for delegates to deepen their
knowledge about the organisations, their activities and the services they
provide. Let us continue,with this successful experience also in the
subsequent review cycles of the NPT.
Thank you.

