Belgium
CLUSTER III Statement
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT)
First session, Vienna, 2-12 May 2017

Mr Chairman,
This statement is fully aligned with that of the European Union.
Belgium is one of the countries with an extensive nuclear sector: there
are 7 nuclear power reactors, in addition to research institutions and
waste treatment facilities. The production of various types of medical
isotopes meets 20
% of world demand.
We therefore have a full understanding of the benefits which splitting the
atom can bring to all of us. They exceed the production of nuclear power,
and are engrained in our countries’ pathways towards development.
A successful and responsible use of the atom is based on three crucial
underpinnings: safety, security and safeguards. Strict adherence to
international agreements, norms and guidance, such as those developed
under the auspices of the IAEA are essential for peaceful use. Without
them, no nuclear program will earn, nor deserve the trust of our
ci ti zen ry.
With respect to safety, Belgium’s nuclear sector is operated in full
conformity with the appropriate Euratom directives and it is regularly
reviewed by the IAEA through peer exercises. Even as we move towards
the progressive phase out of our seven power reactors by 2025, safety
remains our top priority.
Moving to security, let me recall we were participated to the Nuclear
Security Summit process from 2010 to 2016. Our involvement in this
process helped strengthen our national security framework. This work, as
in many countries, is a continuous process. It is now incumbent upon the
IAEA to further develop its role in strengthening the global nuclear
security architecture. Belgium has supported this important work with a
yearly voluntary contribution to the Nuclear Security Fund of 300.000
USD since 2010.
Mr Chairman,
My country is one of the major producers of medical radioisotopes, which
play a paramount role in cancer diagnosis and therapy. We will continue
this production, adding new applications and increasing safety.

through a
Complex challenges such as global health need to be tackled
like
collective effort. We therefore believe it is important for organizations
the IAEA, but also the WHO and UNODC to explore and deepen
partnerships on human health. The fight against cancer is a case in point.
In the field of Food and Agriculture the IAEA and the FAO have a set a
remarkable precedent in joint planning and pooling resources.
Mr Chairman
Technological advances in the nuclear field and beyond do not cease.
p the
The Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK-CEN) continues to develo
ve
innovative research infrastructure called MYRRHA with the main objecti
and
ing
of providing the research community with a highly perform
versatile installation to carry out material and fuel testing. Particular
attention will be given to the transmutation of long-lived radioactive
g
waste. Our research centre also remains an active provider of trainin
n to
services to the TAFA. Before the end of this year it will be in a positio
IAEA
of
hers
put its research rand other facilities at the disposal of researc
the
members states for education, training and joint R&D projects, under
International Centre on Research reactors (ICERR)[SS-M2]
rays I
On another note, alternative sterilization technologies using X
and
jJor protontherapy are developing at great speed. Countries
new
organizations such as the IAEA do well to keep abreast of these
developments and ensure a level playing field.
to the
Mr Chairman, in all these fields Belgium will seek to contribute
in the
responsible development of the peaceful use of nuclear technology
best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.

