Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes pre-exists the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Article IV of the Treaty does not create this right. It just ascertains that nothing in the Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting this right. That is why the so called third pillar is different in nature from the other pillars. That is why this right cannot be subject to conditions. The obligations to disarm and not to proliferate have to be fulfilled regardless of the decisions of each State Party concerning the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The intention of the Parties to the NPT, as embodied in the letter and in the spirit of the Treaty, continue to be the provision of a framework of confidence and cooperation within which the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy can take place. The reaffirmation of this right is all the more important at a time when issues related to noncompliance have emerged to the forefront of the international debate.
Brazil acknowledges the fact that nuclear programs designed for peaceful purposes may be used to cover nuclear proliferation. However, the development of nuclear weapons has never been an unintentional result of peaceful activities. On the contrary, it has always
stemmed from political decisions, related to strategic and power perceptions and objectives. In this regard, proposals aimed at addressing the concern with proliferation tend, on the one hand, to ignore the successful record of the system of safeguards in place for non-nuclear-weapon IAEA members, and on the other, to hold the NPT liable for situations that would show it as ineffective to prevent proliferation. In spite of exceptional cases of non-compliance, the provisions of Article IV are not open to any reinterpretation or revision, nor should they serve as a pretext to curtail bona fide, lawful programs of scientific or economic and social interest in developing countries.
Mr. Chairman,
The need to secure energy supply is central to development. Nuclear energy is gaining a paramount role in the energy profile of the world. Besides being a clean and reliable source for electricity generation, nuclear applications are widespread in medicine, agriculture, industry and environmental protection. No society should be excluded from the access to nuclear technology.
Brazil follows with interest the debates on the concept of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle. In our view, this issue must be thoroughly considered in the framework of the IAEA in its political, technical, strategic and economic aspects. No need to say that such proposals ought not to hamper legitimate peaceful programs developed and carried out under IAEA comprehensive safeguard agreements by States that fully observe NPT rules.
The Constitution of Brazil limits the development and uses of nuclear energy only to peaceful purposes. A member of the IAEA since 1957, Brazil has engaged actively in the work of the Agency, with the aim of ensuring the development of the peaceful use of nuclear technology and to promoting international cooperation in this area. These goals remain relevant to Brazil and to the international community as a whole.
I thank you.