
The strength, credibility and permanence of the NPT rest on a fundamental bargain which must be recognized and upheld if we want the Treaty to be effective and lasting. This bargain was at the core of the creation of the IAEA more than fifty years ago, and it was later to prove instrumental in establishing the Treaty itself and in making it a quasi-universal regime. The right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, enshrined in Article IV of the NPT, thus constitutes one of the three pillars of the Treaty.
Brazil acknowledges that peaceful nuclear programs can be used as a cover for nuclear proliferation. However, some proposals made to avert this possibility, on the one hand, ignore the successful track record of the system of safeguards now in place and, on the other, wrongfully blame the NPT for loopholes that supposedly would show the Treaty's ineffectiveness to avoid nuclear non-proliferation. Exceptional cases of non-compliance should not be invoked so as to justify any reinterpretation, or even review, of the provisions of article IV. Let's not forget that Article IV explicitly denies any discrimination regarding States Party. The sole difference Article IV establishes refers to non-nuclear-weapon States Party, especially in "developing areas of the world".
Mr Chairman,
The need to secure energy supply was a core concern throughout the XXth century. The perspectives for energy in the XXIst century with mounting needs and increasing costs are now at the center of economic, political and strategic preoccupations. Nuclear energy - particularly as new, safer, proliferation-resistant reactors are developed - will have a prominent role in the energy profile of the world. Besides being a clean and reliable source for the generation of electricity, nuclear applications are widespread in medicine, industry, agriculture, and environmental protection. No society, regardless of its level of development, can afford not to make use, as necessary, of nuclear technologies, especially in a world haunted by climate change.
Brazil deems essential that proposals put forward with regard to the concept of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle do not hinder legitimate peaceful nuclear programs developed and carried out under IAEA safeguard agreements by States that fully abide by the rules of the NPT. In our view, this question must be subject to careful consideration, in view of its long-term implications. Such multilateral approaches might be pursued but cannot supersede legal instruments in force.
Mr Chairman,
Brazil is a member of the IAEA since 1957. We participate in an active and constructive manner in the work of the Agency, with the aim of ensuring the right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology and to promote international cooperation in this field. The development and use of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes is a fundamental principle of our national policy, which is enshrined in our Constitution. We have developed wide-ranging production capabilities, from mining and processing of uranium to U02 and nuclear fuel element production, all the way to isotopic uranium enrichment. We remain convinced of the potential benefits of the responsible use of nuclear technologies and of the synergies fostered by international cooperation in the nuclear field, for which the work of the IAEA is of great importance.