BRAZIL
Statement by the Delegation of Brazil

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons - Main Committee III

New York, 4 May 2015

(check against delivery)
Mr. Chairman,
Brazil joins previous speakers in congratulating you on assuming the chairmanship of this
Committee. You can count on the full cooperation and support of the Brazilian delegation in
carrying out your duties.
Article IV of the NPT expressly recognizes "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the
Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes". It
also provides that all the parties to the Treaty must "facilitate, and have the right to participate
in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological
information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy".
Brazil places great importance on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. We are fully
convinced that nuclear technology will continue to be of great relevance for the achievement
of the MDGs, as well as for the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It is thus
essential that all States be allowed to have access and make use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
In this connection, Brazil attaches particular relevance to the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme, in which we have been, for many decades, an active participant, as both
beneficiary and donor country.
We understand that the safe and secure use of nuclear technology is the only way humanity
can fully benefit from it. The strengthening of international commitments in these areas must
serve the purpose of providing a stable environment which facilitates the promotion of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, by preventing risks and threats that may result from the
inappropriate or non-authorized use of nuclear energy.
It is our view, however, that legitimate concerns with nuclear security and safety cannot be
used as pretext for the imposition of constraints on the inalienable right of States to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Mr. Chainnan,
As regards nuclear safety, the Fukushima accident was undoubtedly the most significant
event in recent years. Our collective response through the IAEA was timely and appropriate.
An IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety gathered in June 2011 and requested the
Agency's Director General to develop a draft Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, which was
adopted by the Board of Governors and unanimously endorsed by the General Conference in
September of that year. In Brazil's view, progress in the implementation of the Action Plan
has been good, in large measure thanks to the work of the IAEA Secretariat.
We also take this opportunity to express our satisfaction with the results of the Diplomatic
Conference of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS), which
took place last February under the able leadership of Argentina. In line with other efforts
being undertaken to improve nuclear safety at the national, regional and global levels, the
Vienna Declaration adopted at the Diplomatic Conference represents a significant building
block in reinforcing the CNS peer review mechanism and establishing principles to guide
Contracting Parties, as appropriate, in the implementation of the objective to prevent
accidents and mitigate radiological consequences should they occur.
Turning to nuclear security, Brazil is fully aware of the need to prevent terrorists or other
non-authorized actors from gaining access to nuclear devices, materials and facilities. We
have thus actively participated in IAEA Conferences and in the Nuclear Security Summits, as
we continue to develop and implement robust, effective and adequate legislation in this area.
As Brazil stressed in the Nuclear Security Summit that took place last year in the
Netherlands, it is not civilian nuclear facilities but atomic bombs that pose the greatest
security risk to our societies. Today, as we know, all stockpiles of nuclear material for
military use are exempt from multilateral control mechanisms.
These concerns led Brazil to submit, along with fourteen other countries with a similar view,
the Joint Statement to the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit titled "In larger security: a
comprehensive approach to nuclear security." We understand that it is impossible to
dissociate the quest for nuclear security, as is also the case for nuclear non-proliferation, from
the effective implementation of disannament commitments established in the NPT.
In any event, Brazil believes that the Nuclear Security Summit process has accomplished the
goal of drawing the attention of policy makers at the highest level to the issue of nuclear
security. We expect that, after the Summit that will take place in the United States in 2016,
our collective efforts in this area will converge to the IAEA, a truly universal forum that is
fully equipped to take the matter in its hands with the capability and commitment that are
commensurate with the importance that we all ascribe to the issue of nuclear security.
Mr. Chairman,
Brazil understands that some States parties intend to address the issue of withdrawal within
this Committee. We are prepared to engage in this debate in a constructive manner.
As a general comment, let me say at the outset that, for Brazil, consideration of withdrawal
from the NPT should be guided less by constraints to be applied to those States parties that
may potentially leave the regime and more by the incentives that should be provided for
States parties to remain within it. States should continue to be bound not because they are
obliged to do so or will be somehow penalized if they decide to withdraw.

States should be bound because they choose to adhere to a regime that is effective in
promoting the goals of disarmament, non-proliferation and development of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
Mr. Chairman,
For the Brazilian delegation, as regards the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, this Review
Conference should, among others:
- recognize the importance of nuclear energy in the promotion of economic and social
development;
- recognize the vital role of the IAEA in the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy;
- call upon States parties to further strengthen the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme;
- encourage the IAEA to take an active part in discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda, including by providing inputs to the process of preparing the forthcoming
Sustainable Development Goals;
- call upon States parties to facilitate, without the imposition of any constraints inconsistent
with the Treaty, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and
technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy;
- call upon States parties to maintain the highest possible standards of safety and security; to
that end, encourage the IAEA to continue to assist States parties in developing and
strengthening national measures of nuclear safety and security;
- recognize that the vast majority of nuclear materials are stockpiled in States possessing
nuclear weapons and are not subject to any safeguards;
- call upon those States to provide greater transparency on their stockpiles of nuclear
materials and the measures taken to ensure the security of such materials;
- recognize that it is not possible to dissociate the quest for nuclear security from the effective
implementation of disarmament obligations established in the NPT.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

