Statement by Canada
First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Vienna, Austria, May 2012
Cluster Ill: Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
Mr. Chairman,
Canada is fully supportive of realizing the greatest possible benefits of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy for NPT states that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. Canada
has a strong nuclear industry with over sixty years of experience and firmly believes nuclear
energy can make an important contribution to prosperity and sustainable development as well
as to mitigating the threat of climate change.
We strongly support responsible and mutually beneficial nuclear cooperation to expand
the use of nuclear energy and continue innovation and improvement of nuclear technologies.
However, development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy must go hand in hand with the
further strengthening of existing frameworks to ensure nuclear energy's growth is secure, safe
and does not contribute to proliferation.
In this regard, the NPT provides a fundamental basis for the development of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy by fostering confidence that nuclear materials and facilities will
not contribute to nuclear proliferation. Cooperation by Canada with other countries on the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy takes fully onto account the non-proliferation credentials of the
recipient country. Canada is committed to working with other States and relevant international
organizations to facilitate new arrangements for the supply of nuclear items, consistent with the
balance of rights and obligations agreed to in the Treaty and in particular in Articles 11, Ill, and
IV.
Canada currently has 27 Nuclear Cooperation Agreements in force covering 44 States
Parties to the NPT, both developed and developing. These Agreements provide a framework for
the fullest possible exchange of nuclear and other material, equipment and technology. We are
also actively working to engage in nuclear cooperation with additional partners who meet our
non-proliferation requirements. All our Agreements are reciprocal and we abide by the same
requirements that we expect of our partners.
IAEA Technical Cooperation Program is of primary importance in assisting Member
States in the peaceful use of nuclear energy under the best safety, security and nonproliferation conditions through the development of effective programs aimed at improving their
scientific, technological and regulatory capabilities. Canada has consistently been a strong

Page 2
supporter of this Program which, along with the Agency's other promotional activities, comprises
the central pillar of its work. Canada has often met or exceeded the rate of attainment for
voluntary contributions to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund. Canadian industry, academic
and regulatory leaders share their technical expertise by mentoring technical cooperation
fellowship participants and providing formal instruction to other trainees. Canada's contribution
also includes the provision of high-quality and advanced equipment, technology and services for
individual technical cooperation projects. Canada continues to encourage further strengthening
of the Program to make it more transparent, accountable and results-oriented.
Similarly, Canada strongly supports the IAEA's efforts to broaden sustainable access to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This includes, inter alia, assisting the progress of Member
States along the "Milestones in the Development of a National Infrastructurefor Nuclear Power".
Canadian experts have been contributing to all IAEA Major Programmes since the Agency's
inception, and they continue to assist in the dissemination of nuclear knowledge and experience
to other Member States. Agency safety and security standards, nuclear energy guidance
documents, and peer-review assessments have benefitted from Canada's history of providing
cost-free expertise of its scientists, engineers and regulators.
Canada commends the many important safety activities which have been taken postFukushima. In particular, we note the collective commitment of the lAEA and Member States to
improving nuclear safety, which is demonstrated through the progress made in the
implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety. Canada continues to believe that the
implementation of the Agency's Action Plan should be robust, effective and transparent. All
states with nuclear facilities should collectively commit to making public all relevant safety peer
reviews, as this is necessary to rebuild public trust and confidence.
Since 2002, Canada has worked through the 24-member Global Partnership Program to
secure, and when possible, destroy weapons and materials of mass destruction. Of the C$820
million Canada has contributed to the Global Partnership Program to date, more than C$400
million has been spent on nuclear security programming. At the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit
in Seoul, Canada's Prime Minister announced that Canada's Global Partnership Program has
been renewed with an additional C$367 million for WMD threat reduction programming between
2013 and 2018.
Finally, full implementation of IAEA safeguards, which includes the ratification of an
Additional Protocol, makes a vital contribution to establishing an environment of confidence for
the development of and international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It is
important for this forum to continue to make every effort to ensure compliance with NPT nonproliferation and verification requirements and to address possible abuses of the NPT's
withdrawal provision.
Canada welcomes the views of others and looks forward to constructive discussion of
these important issues as the work of this Preparatory Committee proceeds.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
