NPT Review Conference
CANADA
New York, 4 May 2015

MAIN COMMITTEE III
OPENING CANADIAN STATEMENT

*****

Mr. Chairman.

Canada is pleased to welcome you as Chairman of Main Committee III, and wish
to offer you Canada's full support and cooperation as you preside over our
deliberations. To this end, we look forward to engaging with you and our
colleagues in meaningful and constructive dialogue as we work towards achieving
tangible and positive results.

The right to pursue the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is a fundamental pillar of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty which exists in balance with obligations to forswear
nuclear weapons and subscribe to the stringent verification requirements of the
Treaty. States in full compliance with their peaceful use obligations arising from
Article I, II and III of the Treaty can have access to the peaceful applications of
nuclear energy to support sustainable socioeconomic development for people and
societies. Canada is pleased to contribute to the full spectrum of those activities
ranging from human health, agriculture, food security, water, the environment,
energy, radiation technology and security and safety. As you know, the G7
1

other States Party through the framework of the IAEA and on a bilateral basis to
share our knowledge in the full range of power and non-power applications. Our
expertise related to the nuclear fuel cycle is shared with our closest partners in the
context of responsible and mutually beneficial nuclear cooperation. Canada
currently has 30 Nuclear Cooperation Agreements covering 48 countries, and is
ready to engage in new nuclear cooperation with diverse partners who meet our
non-proliferation requirements. As reciprocal Treaties, our cooperation agreements
not only project the high non-proliferation standards that Canada itself embraces,
but establishes the requirements that we expect of our bilateral partners. In this
regard, we support the Vienna Group of 10's call for making the Additional
Protocol a Condition of Supply and encourage all states that have not already done
so to conclude and bring an AP into force. Canada also believes that the Additional
Protocol, along with a comprehensive safeguards agreement, represents the
verification standard pursuant to Article III(1) of the Treaty. Under this framework,
countries can be confident that the continued growth and expansion of nuclear
energy can take place in a manner which is safe, secure and does not contribute to
proliferation.

Canada believes that only the full implementation of IAEA safeguards can create
the conditions which make states confident that their cooperation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in no way contributes to the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This Committee should recommend that the Review Conference stress
that State Party compliance with the non-proliferation and verification
requirements of the Treaty is a necessary precondition for access to peaceful
nuclear cooperation.

3



