Mister Chairman,
Thank you for this opportunity to express Canada's views on that aspect of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) dealing with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Canada regards the NPT as one of the most powerful documents ever negotiated in the post-war era, in terms of its positive impact on international stability and security . With 188 states parties, it is certainly one of the most successful treaties, if not the most successful treaty, in history- Canada believes the NPT has contributed, and continues to contribute to international peace, security and development.
By creating a stable and predictable international security environment in which nuclear cooperation between and among States can occur, the Treaty encourages the development of the peaceful non explosive uses of nuclear energy. Article IV of the NPT affirms the "inelienable right" of all Slates Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This right, however, docs not exist in a vacuum. As negotiated, the Treaty comprises a series of implicit but wcll-recognised bargains to which all States Parties have agreed. Among these bargains, non-nuclear-weapon States agree not to acquire nuclear weapons and to accept comprehensive safeguards on their nuclear activities, in the context of NWS' commitment to nuclear disarmament and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Therefore, while peaceful nuclcar cooperation and access to the benelits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy pursuant to Article IV are elemental components of the NPT, they tire inextricably linked to the nuclear non-proliferation and nuclcar disarmament obligations of the Treaty. None of these elements exists on its own in isolation. The NPT is not an a la carte menu from which States Parties may chose their preferences, while ignoring other aspects.
Mister Chairman,
We must reiterate, in this regard, the fundamental relationship between Article IV and the nuclear non-proliferation undertakings of Articles I, II and III of the NPT. This relationship is reflected in Article IV which indicates that the "inalienable right" of Article IV must be "in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty." While Article III is not specifically mentioned in Article IV, it is nevertheless directly relevant as it identifies the means by which States' Article 1 and II commitments are verified.
This relationship has been further endorsed by Parties to the Treaty at successive Review Conferences, most recently in the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference which noted "that the non-proliferation and safeguards commitments in the Treaty are also essentisil for peaceful nuclear commerce and cooperation", and "that the transfer of nuclear-related equipment, information, material and facilities, resources or devices should be consistent with states' obligations under the Treaty."
States' rights of access to nuclear items and expertise cannot therefore be considered unqualified, particularly when there may be questions about peaceful intentions, or over the impact on regional and international security and stability. In referring to the " fill lest possible" exchange of nuclear expertise, Article IV of the NPT implicitly recognizes that there may be limitations to such an exchange.
Mister Chairman,
Canada has long recognized the benefits to be derived from the exploitation of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Canada's own domestic nuclear energy programme stretches back over five decades. There are currently 22 nuclear power reactors in Canada which are operated by both public utilities and private companies. Nuclear energy meets approximately 16% of Canada's total energy needs. Nuclear power remains an important component of my country's current and future national energy strategy.
Canada remains committed to sharing the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with others. Canada has concluded full nuclear cooperation agreements with 37 other States in the world. CANDLJ power reactors are currently in operation or under construction in several other States. Canada is the world's largest producer and exporter of uranium and medical isotopes. We believe nuclear power will continue to garner broad support in many States around the world as a safe, sustainable source of energy. We are encouraged that renewed interest is being demonstrated in the nuclear option as an effective means of addressing global greenhouse emissions. We are also actively engaged in Canada and in other States, in applying our nuclear expertise in agriculture and medicine and in industry, waste management, national nuclear regulatory affairs, and fundamental and applied research, and beyond.
We also recognize that international organizations have an essential role to play in assisting Parties to the Treaty in exploiting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We fully support the IAEA's programmes and activities, and commend the Agency for its efforts to address the
needs of its Member States. We remain a leading contributor to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund, and are the second largest contributor to the Agency's Nuclear Security Action Plan. Canada is also an active member of the OF.CD's Nuclear Energy Agency and strongly supports a range of international nuclear energy activities in the G8 and other fora.
Clearly, Mister Chairman, we believe in Article IV. At the same time, we are greatly troubled by the recent revelations of non-compliance by certain States Party with their obligations under Article III of the Treaty. The actions of these States Parties have raised serious concerns about the potential for peaceful nuclear activities to contribute to clandestine nuclear weapons programs, for example through the diversion of internationally-supplied nuclear material and dual-use equipment, technology and information. Such actions undermine what 1 referred to earlier as the stable and predictable international security environment in which nuclear cooperation between and among States can occur.
In light of these developments. Canada believes that traditional approaches to peaceful nuclear cooperation must be enhanced in response to the serious challenges facing the nuclcar non-proliferation regime. The relationship between Articles III, IV and the other obligations of the NPT must be recognized and maintained. We believe that Parties to the Treaty should collaborate in seeking a positive clarification of this relationship at the 2005 Review Conference. Cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy must in future be structured in a way which better addresses proliferation concerns while maintaining an overall commitment to the inherent goals of Article IV, particularly in terms of assisting the developing world to achieve sustainable development.
Canada would support, in this regard, the initiation of a discussion on the development of a new cooperative framework between supplier states and customer stales in which the preoccupations of both groups of states are addressed in a satisfactory manner. We welcome the recent statements by the IAEA Director General and his commitment to establish a new ad hoc experts group to study multilateral nuclear fuel cycle concepts. We believe the IAEA could have a valuable role to play in this area. A number of other states have also expressed some interesting ideas for other ways of ensuring the reliable supply of nuclear material, equipment and technology to all States, in a manner consistent with the reinforcement of nuclear non-proliferation commitments and standards.
Mister Chairman,
There is an old saying that every black cloud has a silver lining. 1 don't know how exactly the interpreters will choose to translate this, but my point is that wc have both a challenge and an opportunity before us. By recognizing and renewing our common commitment to this relationship among Articles 1, It, III and IV, we can. at the same time, open the door to exploring new and innovative ways in which cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can be further nurtured and enhanced. We hope that States Party will be in a position to review positive progress on these issues at the 2005 Review Conference. In closing. Mister Chairman, and in
keeping with our commitment to transparency, it is Canada's view that this Cluster discussion should be an open meeting.
