2013 Preparatory Committee of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III: Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
Statement by Canada
Mr. Chairman,
Canada is deeply attached to the rights enshrined in Article IV of the Treaty and staunch in their
defence. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy offer great potential for development and
modernization of all States Parties, including through electricity production, improving the health
of their citizens and industrial and agricultural applications. But Article IV implementation must
be in conformity with Articles I and II of the Treaty: with access to these benefits come
obligations and responsibilities to ensure that stringent safeguards are put in place to reassure
the international community that diversion of nuclear technology and materials for weapons
purposes is not taking place. Countries such as Canada who have fully assumed those
responsibilities and lived up to their obligations fully enjoy the benefits. However, countries that
fail to fully respect and implement their NPT non-proliferation commitments, such as Iran,
should not continue to have full access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy until they are in
full compliance with those commitments and confidence is restored that no nuclear weapons
activities are taking place. Sustaining confidence in the Treaty requires that we ensure that the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear technology in no way contribute to nuclear
weapons proliferation.
Canada is a country rich in uranium resources with a world class nuclear industry covering
virtually the full nuclear fuel cycle . We are committed to nuclear power which currently provides
15% of our electrical energy needs. We believe that nuclear power has, and will continue to
have, an important place in a well-balanced and judicious energy mix. As older units go offline in
the coming decades, we intend to hold steady our nuclear generating capacity by building
several additional power reactors. We also remain one of the world's largest exporters of
medical radio isotopes and uranium.
As one of the world's leading suppliers of nuclear materials and technology, Canada is
committed to sharing our capabilities ina responsible manner. We have expanded our network
of nuclear partners for mutually beneficial cooperation and currently have in force Nuclear
Cooperation Agreements covering 44 countries worldwide. We are actively working to engage in
nuclear cooperation with additional partners meeting our non-proliferation requirements.
Canada is fully meeting its commitments to peaceful uses under the Treaty and the agreements
of 2000 and 2010, which are highlighted in Canada's report on its implementation of the NPT
submitted to this PrepCom.
In addition, Canada continues to support the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Program of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Through financial contributions as well as provision
of expertise delivered by representatives from industry, academic institutions and regulatory
bodies, we deliver on our commitment to share the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In the wake of the .nuclear accident in Fukushima, Canada attaches even more importance to
nuclear safety. All Canadian nuclear facilities have undergone, and fully passed, a rigorous

safety review. In this regard, we remain committed to continuously improving nuclear safety in
Canadian facilities and to contribute to the efforts of the IAEA to establish safety and security
standards and develop codes of conduct and best practice in this field. In particular, we would
note progress on implementing the .IAEA's Actien Plan en Nuclear Safety since our last meeting.
Canada recently hosted the IAEA Intematienal Conference en Effective Nuclear Regulatery
Systems.
Equally important to safety in facilitating the continued grewth and peaceful use of nuclear
energy are safeguards, security and expprt controls. Each .of these elements is essential in
ensuring that the use of this important technology is in keeping with the prinCiples and
.obligations .of the Treaty and previaus review conference agreements. Canada has a robust
nuclear export controls system to provide the international community with the highest level of
confidence that our exports do not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons . With a
view to following up on one of the recommendations made in the Non-Proliferation ·and
Disarmament Initiative's working paper on export controls submitted to this PrepCom, Canada is
prepared ta share its national experiences and information on our export controls with all States
Parties that are interested in strengthening their own natianal systems. Canada is also open to ·
conSidering a set of crite[ia governing nuclear trade with countries that have yet to sign on to the
NPT as part of the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
Canada continues to implement the provisions of its safeguards agreement and Additional
Protocol with the IAEA. Since 2005, Canada has maintained the Agency's highest conclusion
that all nuclear material under its jurisdictian remains in peaceful activities. Canada believes that
this safeguards standard makes a vital contribution to establishing an environment of
confidence that would allow the mast free and unfettered international cooperation to allow
States Parties to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly in the developing
world.
Unfortunately, the high level of confidence that Canada maintains and promotes does not exist
among all States Parties. We regret that some States Parties have been found in noncompliance with their IAEA safeguards agreements, including Iran, North Korea and Syria.
Canada strongly supports the efforts of the IAEA and the UN Security Council to address such
cases of non-compliance and for exploring whether the NPT may have a role to play in this
regard as well. We must ensure that States Parties comply with the non-proliferatian and
verification requirements of the NPT and that abuse of the NPT's provisions through the pursuit
of weapons activities is addressed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

