Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster Ill: Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
Statement by Canada
Mr. Chair ,
Access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is not only safeguarded by Article IV of the
NPT , but ensuring safe , secure and sustainable access to nuclear energy may very well
dictate whether the international community will be successful in meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals and mitigating the effects of climate change .
In order to maximise our ability to use nuclear energy and technology to advance these
shared goals, Canada believes that countries should have strong nuclear safety and nuclear
security measures in place to facilitate international cooperation with respect to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. Ensur ing high standards of nuclear safety and security directly
facilitates the exchange of equipment and knowledge pertaining to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy . In turn , confidence that countries receiving nuclear expertise , equipment and
materials have implemented and maintain strong domestic nuclear security and safety
measures enables a higher volume of trade and cooperation than would otherwise exist.
It is in this light that Canada engages in, and finances, domestic and international efforts to
increase nuclear security globally. We have contributed more than 42 million Canadian
dollars to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Nuclear Security Fund since 2004
through Global Affairs Canada's WMD Threat Reduction Program . Total voluntary
contributions to the Agency 's activities since the Program's inception exceed 65 million
dollars .
Canada is providing funding to over 20 different nuclear secur ity-related projects that are
being implemented by the IAEA. Key activities include enhancing nuclear security regulatory
infrastructure in Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean ; securing or removing highactivity disused sealed radioact ive sources in Latin America and the Caribbean , the Middle
East and Central Asia ; upgrading the physical protection of nuclear facilities in South and
Southeast Asia and the Middle East ; strengthen ing nuclear security response capabilities in
Latin America and the Caribbean ; and supporting research and development to enhance
cybersecurity for nuclear facilities . We consider these to be among our most strategic
investments in the security domain . In that regard , the government of Canada approved in
January 2018 the extension of the mandate of the WMD Threat Reduction Program , which
will allow it to continue to strengthen nuclear and radio logical security around the world well
into the future.
We would like to highlight the key role played by the IAEA in ensuring the success of the
peaceful uses pillar of the NPT . Given the increasing importance of the Agency 's work on
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy , it is imperative that States refrain from requesting the
Agency to take on a role in areas outside its mandate, such as disarmament or nuclear
material used for military purposes . Though these are extremely important issues, Canada
remains concerned that attempting to deal with them under the umbrella of the IAEA detracts
from the Agency 's central role in upholding the NPT's peaceful uses pillar. Instead , IAEA
resources would be better directed to facilitating the safe and secure access of all States to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy , as we collectively seek to reduce our impact on the
environment , and to improve the quality of life for all.
Thank you .

