Mr. Chair,
By increasing stability and predictability in the international peace and security context, the NPT provides a critical framework to enable further development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Within this framework, Canada adheres to 3 core principles:
•	balancing rights and obligations under the NPT;
•	responsible supply, development and promotion; and
•	commitment to innovation and improvement.
I would like to briefly address each of these principles and Canada's efforts in this regard. Balancing Rights and Obligations Under the NPT
Canada is committed to maintaining its position as a global leader in the nuclear sector, while ensuring that the highest standards of non-proliferation, safeguards, security and safety are maintained. We take a holistic approach to the Treaty and recognize that the rights enshrined therein must be exercised by all states in full compliance with obligations. Domestically, we have received and maintained the broad conclusion from the IAEA that all nuclear material and activities in Canada are applied exclusively to peaceful uses.
Responsible Supply, Development and Promotion
We recognize that the many benefits of nuclear energy also bear certain risks. To mitigate these risks, Canada supports and implements a robust export-control system and actively participates in multilateral export-control and non-proliferation fora.
As a leader in the nuclear field, Canada highly values its nuclear industry and is particularly proud of the CANDU's record with regard to safety and non-proliferation as ensured by safeguards, and our leading role producing and exporting radioisotopes for medical and industrial uses. As the world's largest exporter of uranium and a major provider of conversion services, Canada is interested in more fully integrating our reliable nuclear services into the international nuclear fuel markets.
Canada is committed to sharing these capabilities as a responsible nuclear supplier country. To this end, we currently have nuclear cooperation agreements in place covering 43 NPT member states and contribute more that $2.46 million annually to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund. We are also actively engaged in applying our nuclear expertise in agriculture, medicine, industry, waste management, and other areas for the greater benefit of all NPT States Party.
Commitment to Innovation and Improvement
Nuclear power is essential to Canada's energy mix currently providing 15 percent of our electricity supply and, like many other nations here today, Canada is actively pursuing an
expansion of our nuclear energy capacity. We believe nuclear energy holds significant promise for the future in terms of addressing development and energy needs and mitigating the threat of climate change. In this regard we support innovation and improvement of nuclear technologies, of the framework in which nuclear energy is provided, and of the regimes in place to ensure nuclear energy's growth is secure, safe and does not contribute to proliferation.
Canada is fully supportive of the greatest possible realization of the benefits of nuclear energy for NPT states that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. To this end: we continue to share our experience in implementing the Additional Protocol; we support development of new mechanisms to augment the reliability of access to nuclear fuel which complement existing commercial markets; we continue to support the technical cooperation efforts of the IAEA; we are implementing the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources; and we are active member of the Gen IV Forum.
Mr. Chair,
In conclusion, it is our view that this conference should make concrete recommendations to the Review Conference which would ensure that the balance of rights and responsibilities enshrined in the Treaty is protected and made practically implementable.
These could include recommendations that the Review Conference:
•	Further recognize the rights and responsibilities related to the peaceful use of nuclear energy;
•	Bolster support for research and development aimed at expanding nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner to address global energy needs and climate concerns;
•	Endorse strengthened export controls to ensure that nuclear energy's growth is not impeded by non-proliferation concerns;
•	Confirm the Additional Protocol as a mandatory condition of supply; and
Recommend that suppliers adopt a strict criteria-based approach to the transfer of enrichment and reprocessing technology.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
