2017 Preparatory Committee meeting of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster III: Other provisions of the Treaty
Statement by Canada
Mr. Chairman,
I would first like to extend to you the Canadian delegation’s appreciation for holding this session.
I would like to focus my remarks on strengthening the NPT’s review process, and matters
related to Article X and withdrawal from the Treaty.
Canada believes in advancing the principle of “permanence with accountability” that
underpinned the decision on strengthening the review process when the Treaty was indefinitely
extended in 1995. We believe that most States Parties also strongly support taking action to
strengthen the NPT’s review process. However, we also recognize the reluctance among some
to devoting limited time and resources on these issues, given other more pressing challenges
and priorities. It is important that we continue to exchange views about how best to strengthen
governance and accountability in the NPT in order to move this agenda forward in the current
review cycle.
One way that all States Parties can contribute to strengthening the NPT’s review process is
through regular reporting. Let me reiterate our call for all States Parties, both Nuclear- and NonNuclear Weapon States, to fulfil their commitments to better reporting in Step 12 of the 13
Practical Steps in 2000 and actions 20 and 21 in the 2010 Action Plan.
Pursuant to these commitments, all States Parties should voluntarily provide information on their
efforts to implement all articles of the Treaty, as well as key political agreements from previous
RevCons, given the intertwined nature of the Treaty’s three pillars. Canada has already led by
example by submitting annual reports to NPT meetings on our efforts to implement all articles of
the NPT, the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, the 13 Practical Steps from 2000 and, most
recently, the 2010 Action Plan. In our view, this type of reporting provides the highest level of
transparency and can contribute greatly to confidence-building among States Parties.
To facilitate the filing of country reports on commitments under the 2010 Action Plan, Canada
and our NPDI partners have submitted a working paper on Transparency, which sets out a
common reporting template for all 64 action plan items that all NPT States Parties can use. This
builds upon previous working papers submitted at the 2012 and 2014 PrepComs, as well as the
2015 RevCon. During this year’s PrepCom, Canada also co-hosted a side-event with Japan on
the subject of transparency, which highlighted this new reporting template. We encourage all
States Parties to submit country reports using this template by the 2020 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
A further means to strengthen the review cycle and the NPT regime is to examine more fully
how to address questions relating to withdrawal from the Treaty. Article X recognizes the right of
states to leave the NPT in extraordinary circumstances. However, that there are lessons to be
learned from the DPRK's attempt to withdraw from the Treaty should be clear to all. While the
treaty provides the right of withdrawal, it does not provide clear and agreed guidelines for
addressing the many practical and procedural issues that must be addressed should a State

decide to execute this right. At its core, this is about the pledge we all made to one another
upon ratifying the Treaty to ensure mutual accountability.
Canada would again like to highlight working paper “47” (NPT/CONF.2015/WP.47) submitted at
the 2015 RevCon about the exercise of the right of withdrawal. This paper outlines a number of
principles governing the exercise of withdrawal. These principles are designed to address key
issues, including: continued responsibility for non-compliance committed prior to withdrawal; the
need for engagement to address concerns without recourse to the ultimate decision to withdraw;
and, the importance of the rights of nuclear suppliers to ensure that materials provided remain
under safeguard, are returned and/or destroyed.
I thank you, Mr.Chairman,

