
A major strength of the NPT is that, in increasing stability and predictability in the international peace and security framework, it enables further development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Article IV affirms the 'inalienable right' of all States Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. However, this right is explicitly linked with the requirement for conformity to the non-proliferation requirements of Articles I and II. Article III is related because it identifies the means by which States Parties' Article II commitments are verified.
One of the first countries to develop indigenous technologies for nuclear power generation, through the CANDU design, Canada has 22 nuclear power reactors which meet 16% of the country's total electricity needs. There are several proposals for the construction of new power reactors, the first to be built in Canada since the 1980's, and refurbishment is ongoing at two existing nuclear power plants.
The nuclear industry and its supporting infrastructure are important contributors to our national economy. They capitalize on our nation's vast reserves of natural uranium, which make Canada the world's largest exporter of uranium for nuclear fuel and a provider of conversion services for the international market. Canadian industry has recently expressed an interest in expanding its fuel cycle activities in the area of enrichment, with a view to enhancing the value of uranium exports and more fully integrating into international uranium and nuclear fuel markets. Canada is also the leading global producer and exporter of radioisotopes for medical and industrial
Canada is committed to sharing the benefits of nuclear energy with other states. We maintain 26 nuclear cooperation agreements that cover 43 NPT member states and have exported CANDU technology to several bilateral partners. To develop new applications for nuclear energy that address current challenges Canada contributes more than $2 million annually to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund.
The many benefits of nuclear energy also bear certain risks. Domestically, we have received and maintained the broad conclusion from the IAEA that all nuclear material and activities in Canada are applied exclusively to peaceful uses, and we are actively moving to a state-level integrated safeguards approach. To mitigate risk in international nuclear cooperation, Canada supports and implements a robust export-control system for nuclear, dual use and risk-significant radioactive sources and we actively participate in the various multilateral export-control and non-proliferation fora.
In November 2007, Canada signed the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership Statement of Principles and has committed to contribute in the areas of enhanced safeguards and cooperative research in developing advanced proliferation-resistant technologies. Canada supports efforts to develop new mechanisms to augment the reliability of access to nuclear fuel which address both peaceful uses and non-proliferation concerns, and ensure commercial competitiveness. Such multilateral fuel-cycle initiatives should be based on criteria that recognize exemplary non-proliferation credentials and legitimate economic or fuel-cycle justification for preserving future uranium processing options. We note the IAEA Director General's recent paper on fuel-cycle options and look forward to discussion of these ideas at the June Board of Governors meeting.
Much has been said lately about a 'renaissance' in the nuclear sector evidenced by renewed interest in development of new nuclear programs and refurbishing established facilities. Canada is committed to maintaining its position as a global leader in the nuclear sector, while ensuring that the highest standards of non-proliferation and safeguards are maintained.
Thank you.
