Check Against Delivery

Statement of Chinese Delegation at the Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
On Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
(1st May, 2018 Geneva)

Mr. Chairman,
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy are one of the Three Pillars of the NPT, and
inalienable rights assigned by the Treaty to all States parties. Peaceful uses of nuclear
energy are favorable to the world’s peace, health and prosperity, facilitating the
comprehensive achievement of all objectives of the Treaty, and advancing the process
of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
The world is undergoing profound changes. Global economic growth lacks energy;
anti-terrorism and security situation is still severe. We are facing multiple risks and
challenges such as environmental pollution and climate change. The Chinese
government attaches great importance to the sustainable development and the issue of
climate change, and is actively establishing a clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient
energy system. As a clean and green energy source, nuclear power is an important
choice for optimizing energy structure and achieving green and sustainable
development. At present, mainland China has 38 nuclear power units in operation, 18
nuclear power units under construction which ranked first in the world. China will
steadily promote nuclear power plant construction under the safe and efficient policy
and achieve the goal of 88GWe total installed capacity of nuclear power plants both in
operation and construction by 2020. We also pay great attention to innovation of
nuclear energy development. China's own 3rd generation of nuclear power technology
“Hualong one” is under construction both in domestic and foreign countries and is
progressing smoothly.
China has issued the “13th Five-Year Nuclear Industrial Development Plan”. A
number of major projects to be carried out during the 13th Five Years will further
promote the application of nuclear technology and the comprehensive development of
nuclear industry.
China has accumulated a lot of experience on nuclear science and technology. We are
willing to use existing resources to provide assistance to the IAEA in supporting
developing countries obtaining low-carbon, clean energy technology, including
nuclear professional human resource training, agricultural pest control and food safety,
1

health care infrastructure construction and public health, water resources and
environmental management, to promote the achievement of 2030 sustainable
development goals.
Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and relevant international
cooperation is one of the important objectives of the NPT and the Statute of IAEA.
China appreciates the efforts made by the IAEA in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Relevant activities of the IAEA should be ensured by commensurate resources.
All IAEA member States should make full and timely payment to the Technical
Cooperation Fund. We call on all member States, especially developed countries, to
take the practical demand of developing countries into consideration, and
continuously strengthen the assistance to developing countries on peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
China takes practical action to support the IAEA in promoting peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. In the past 30 years, China has donated 46 million U.S. dollars to the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Fund. It has received more than 3,000 scholars from
other countries to study and train in China, and sent more than 2,000 experts to
developing countries for technical service. China has donated over 6.4 million euros
to the Technical Cooperation Fund in 2017, ranking third among member States.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear safety is of utmost importance to the healthy and sustainable development of
the peaceful use of nuclear energy in the world. China has always attached great
importance to nuclear safety. We adhere to the safe and efficient policy and upholds
the “safety first, quality first” approach in nuclear energy development. we have
established a strict regulatory system on nuclear safety to ensure the safe and reliable
operation of nuclear facilities. The Nuclear Safety Law has entered into force this year
and the Atomic Energy Act and the Nuclear Security Regulation are in legislative
process. These laws and regulations will further improve the nuclear regulatory
system and ensure the safe development of China's nuclear energy industry.
Mr. Chairman,
China attaches great importance to nuclear security capacity building and is
continuously improving the nuclear security regulations. The Center of Excellence on
Nuclear Security, as the largest regional demonstration center, has carried out a series
of training activities in cooperation with the IAEA and has become an important
platform for nuclear security. We would like to use the CoE to further enhance
relevant international cooperation, construct a network for nuclear security capacity
building, and carry out training of nuclear security professionals, exercises, exchanges,
2

and other activities. We welcome the participation of Asia Pacific countries, countries
along the Belt and Road and other developing countries in relevant projects.
Mr. Chairman,
China attaches importance to the cooperation with other countries in the field of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the premise of nuclear non-proliferation, and
always adheres to the “Opening-up and Win-Win” principal to carry out international
cooperation. China pays special attention to the cooperation with developing countries,
and has been working towards providing assistance to other countries that aspire to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including emerging nuclear energy countries. At
present, China has established a scholarship for atomic energy, It will fund for 40
students from emerging nuclear energy countries each year to study nuclear science
and technology in China. We welcome the participation of relevant member States.
China's commitment to the low-enrichment reconstruction of the Ghanaian Miniature
Neutron Source Reactor has been a success. We are willing to continue to promote the
low-enrichment reconstruction for other countries' research reactor with our
successful experience.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear energy has benefited all mankind in the area of energy, industry, agriculture,
medical, and environment since the beginning of its application, and China is one of
the benefiters. However, there are ups and downs in the development of nuclear
energy, and one country's nuclear accident may affect the global development of
nuclear energy. Therefore, we share a common future in the cause of global nuclear
energy development. China will continue to develop and expand the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy with a responsible attitude. We call on all member States to work
together, deepen cooperation, continue to innovate, ensure nuclear safety, and promote
the nuclear energy to contribute more to the development of human society, fight
against global climate change, environment protection and other common challenges
for mankind.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on nuclear issues, which
elaborates China's relevant positions. We hope the elements contained therein will be
reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

