Mr. Chairman,
Promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the fundamental objectives of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and is conducive to promoting nuclear disarmament and preventing nuclear weapons proliferation. Non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy are mutually complementary and closely linked with each other. Both of them are of great significance to the realization of the goals of the Treaty.
To keep pace with the trend of time which is characterized with peace, development and cooperation, and to cope with the new situation as the world economy develops, the international community should attach more importance to peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in particular, safeguard the legitimate right of the developing countries in this regard. The International Atomic Energy Agency ("IAEA") should attach more importance to increasing demands raised by the developing countries in the nuclear technology application. IAEA should also strengthen its work
in technical cooperation and take effective measures to promote continued development of nuclear power and nuclear technology applications. We also calls upon members of IAEA, particularly those of developed countries, to pay more attention and offer more supports to the technical cooperation activities of the Agency, so as to ensure the smooth operation of the promotional activities of IAEA.
Nuclear safety can be regarded as the lifeline for nuclear power and nuclear technology applications. Over the years, IAEA has taken many positive measures in this area and made significant achievements in this regard. China appreciates these efforts and achievements and hopes IAEA will continuously put emphasis on the construction of the culture of nuclear safety aimed at protecting mankind and environment, establish and update security standard in time to promote development of nuclear industry, as well as assist the member states to increase their own levels of nuclear safety.
Mr. Chairman,
China actively supports the Agency to undertake the cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy according to the purposes of its statute. China actively participates in the technical cooperation on IAEA projects on nuclear power, nuclear physics and nuclear chemistry. China also provides its help as necessary in the form of physical endowment for those projects.
In the field of nuclear safety, China completed domestic legal procedures of joining the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Waste Radiological Management on 29th April, 2006 and submitted the instrument of ratification to IAEA on 13th September. China will strictly fulfil its obligations under the Convention and persistently supporting IAEA's work in the field of nuclear safety.
In the field of nuclear security, China set up nuclear safeguards and security joint training centre with IAEA at the end of last year. China joined "the IAEA Illicit Trafficking Database" to enhance the exchange of information in combating the illicit trafficking of nuclear and other
r
radioactive material!, and works with other member states to guard against and combat$ the illicit activities in this area.
Mr. Chairman,
China's energy supply is facing great pressure in meeting its rapid economic growth. China's State Council approved "the Medium and Long-term Nuclear Power Development Plan (2015-2020)", setting out an important energy strategy of actively promoting its nuclear power industry. According to the Plan, China will increase aggregate nuclear power generation capacity to 40 million KW in 2020. In order to achieve the goals of the medium and long-term development plan, China is pushing forward the construction of the second generation of innovative nuclear power reactors. China is also actively introducing advanced nuclear power technologies from other countries and through efforts on digestion and self-innovation, striving for the eventual realization of localization, self-reliance and bulk production of the third generation of nuclear technology. At the same time, China also puts emphasis on the development of the forth generation of nuclear power technology and fusion energy technology, and actively participates in the joint research and development on advanced nuclear power technology. China will work with countries concerned to enhance the research on advanced nuclear power and thermonuclear fusion and make its own contribution to the solution to energy in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.