Statement by the Chinese Delegation on the Issue of
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy at the First Session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference
(May 20 12, Vienna)
Mr. Chairman,
Promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the essential
objectives of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, and an inalienable right
of all the parties.
Development and utilization of nuclear energy is one of the human's
greatest science and technology achievements during the 20th century.
Since the beginning of the 21st century, nuclear energy has being making
further great contribution to coping with climatic changes and ensuring
energy security. The nuclear accident at Fukushima in 201 1 has made a
negative impact on international nuclear energy development; however, as
an effective energy form to address global energy shortage and climatic
changes, nuclear energy will remain a significant option in many countries'
energy mix for the long-term perspective. The international community
should sum up experiences and lessons learned from this accident earnestly,
enhance nuclear safety continuously and promote safe development of
nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
In accordance with the duties enshrined in the Statute, the International
Atomic Energy Agency carries out work in fields of nuclear power
development and nuclear technology application actively.
Through
technical cooperation, peer review services and etc., the IAEA offers
guidance for its member states to launch their nuclear power plans, provides
technical support and consultation for safe operation of nuclear power plants
under construction, and actively promotes applications of nuclear

technologies in fields like human health, food and agriculture, water
resources and environmental protection and so on. These efforts are fully
affirmed by its member states. China expresses appreciation for the
IAEA's efforts in facilitating peaceful uses of nuclear energy and calls upon
member states, especially developed countries, to provide developing
countries with more technical assistances.
Mr. Chairman,
Developing nuclear energy safely and efficiently, optimizing energy
usage and increasing the supply of clean energy are important contents of
China's energy development strategy. Now, the development of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in China is entering a fast-growing period. In July
201 1, China Experimental Fast Reactor was connected to the grid; in August
201 1, unit 2 of Phase I1 of the Ling Ao nuclear power plant started
commercial operation. On April 8 of this year, unit 4 of the Qinshan Phase
I1 nuclear power plant started commercial operation, which brings the total
number of China's nuclear power units in operation to 15 with an installed
capacity 12.53 GW. Moreover, China's nuclear units under construction
amount to 26 with an installed capacity totaling 29.24 GW. Based on
current development situation, China's installed nuclear power capacity will
exceed the expected 40 GW by 2020. After the Fukushima nuclear
accident, China will make an appropriate adjustment to the scale of mediumand long-term nuclear development based on serious investigation and full
demonstration. China will continue promoting safe, healthy and efficient
development of nuclear energy unshakably.
On the other hand, China attaches great importance to applications of
nuclear technologies in non-power areas. In recent years, China's nuclear
technology application industry is developing fast and has established a
relatively complete technological system. It is moving into a phase of
large-scale and industrialization development with an annual output value
exceeding a hundred billion Yuan RMB and the market prospect is very
bright. China would like to share its experience in nuclear energy

development with other countries under the premise of fulfilling nuclear
non-proliferation obligations.
Mr. Chairman,
Since 1980s, China has been carrying out fruitful cooperation in the
field of nuclear energy with other countries and international organizations.
China has so far signed bilateral agreements on peaceful uses of nuclear
energy with 25 countries, and carried out extensive cooperation including
personnel exchanges, equipment and technology acquisition, trade, and so
on.
China actively supports and participates in the activities organized by
the IAEA to promote peacekl uses of nuclear energy and carried out a lot of
effective cooperation with the IAEA in various areas, including nuclear
power, nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear security, and nuclear waste management
and etc. China also provides various resources to support the IAEA's
activities to cater the needs of developing countries. In 2011, in
cooperation with the IAEA, China established the International Construction
Training Center of Nuclear Power Plants to jointly train talents in the field of
nuclear power safe construction for developing countries.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear Safety is the lifeline of nuclear power development and nuclear
technology applications. The Chinese government always upholds the
principle of "safety first" in nuclear energy development. After the
Fukushima nuclear accident, China has carried out thorough safety
inspection of all nuclear facilities within its territory immediately,
strengthened safety regulation of nuclear facilities in operation, conducted
safety evaluation of all nuclear power plants under construction using high
standards, and suspended approval of new nuclear power projects until the
Nuclear Safety Planning is accomplished. In addition, China takes
measures to increase investment in research and development of nuclear
safety-related technologies and strengthen the capacity of nuclear safety

regulation. China's nuclear energy development is making new progress
with the precondition of ensuring safety.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear security is a key issue concerning on sustainable development
of nuclear energy, social stability and public security. The Chairman Hu
Jintao attended the Nuclear Security Summit twice and made important
speeches, which reflect China's great emphasis on nuclear security. China
has always devotes to strengthening nuclear security capacity building,
strictly fulfilling its international obligations of nuclear security, conducting
extensive relevant international cooperation and actively providing nuclear
security assistances abroad. China stands ready to work with other
countries to jointly deal with nuclear security challenges.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese delegation submitted a working paper entitled Peaceful
uses of nuclear energy at this session of the Preparatory Committee. We
hope that the elements in this working paper be fully reflected in the relevant
reports of the Preparatory Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

