Mr. President,
Upon congratulating you on your election as President of this Committee, I would like to offer the support of my delegation to your work.
Mr. President,
The delegation of Colombia would like to reiterate the interest it assigns to the results of the prior review conferences and highlights the enormous work that was needed to reach the decisions adopted in 1995 on the indefinite extension of the Treaty and on the resolution on the Middle East and, in 2000 on the adoption of the thirteen practical steps.
The delegation of Colombia considers the development, research and production of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes to be an inalienable right of States Party to a Treaty that includes Nuclear and Non- Nuclear States. This right constitutes an element of balance between these two categories.
International cooperation and national capacity-building have acquired special importance taking into account the demand for energy as a predominant factor in the development possibilities of countries. The development of technical nuclear capacity acquires a special significance in a moment when the international community has identified as one of its main priorities the protection of the environment and the fight against climate change.
Likewise, the delegation of Colombia considers necessary a safe and equitable solution that allows developing countries to have access to the nuclear fuel cycle.
Mr. President,
In this previous context, the delegation of Colombia considers that the success of a process that satisfies Member States to the NPT, with regard to its technical requirements, is linked to the strengthening of
financial, human and technical resources of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
It is a challenge for this Committee to make the relevant recommendations that guarantee access to nuclear technology to all countries and that, at the same time, guarantee that such a transfer could not be used to violate the commitment to non-proliferation.
The delegation of Colombia considers that progress in the previously mentioned goals presents States Party to the NPT with the challenge of advancing towards the universalization of the Treaty.
We acknowledge the offer made by U.S. $ 50 million to support the work of the IAEA and calls on developed countries, particularly nuclear ones, to follow this example.
Mr. President,
In the various meetings held so far in the context of the Eighth -Review Conference, we have often heard the expression "nuclear spring" used to describe a period in which technology and seek new cooperation opportunities for developing countries and the welfare of mankind. However, to make that vision a reality and not run the risk of turning the "spring" in a perpetual and irreversible winter, mechanisms of control and monitoring of the IAEA must be given full political support and financial resources.
The delegation of Colombia supports the document presented by the delegation of Japan on technical cooperation to be developed under the strict monitoring of the International Atomic Energy Agency and recognizes the value this would have for developing countries.
The delegation of Colombia considers it necessary to preserve the integrity of the NPT. In this regard, it would oppose any modification to its text, including article X, as well as any attempt to abuse the interpretation of its clauses that amounts to a weakening of the regime.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



