CZECH REPUBLIC

Statement by

Mrs. Veronika Stromslkova
Director of the United Nations Department,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic

at the Main Committee Ill
of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

New York, 4 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,
Let me assure you of full cooperation of my country's delegation. While fully subscribing to
the statement of the European Union, I would like now to touch upon some items that have
special importance for us nationally.
The Czech Republic has been a steadfast supporter of the right to peaceful use of nuclear
energy, provided that the right is exercised in a responsible manner, through honouring nonproliferation obligations recognized in international standards and safeguards agreements. In
this regard, it is essential to reaffirm the central role of the IAEA not only in the safeguards,
nuclear safety and security but also in non-energy nuclear applications.
In connection with peaceful uses, we would like to draw attention to their conditions set out
by the Treaty, i.e. in conformity with Articles I and II. It is therefore valid to stress the need
for universalisation of export controls and their implementation in line with UNSCR 1540
(2004). Only the universal application of these norms can facilitate more reliable environment
for transfers of technologies and dual use goods.
The Czech Republic underlines the importance of international cooperation in order to
strengthen nuclear safety and security and to reach universal accession to all relevant
conventions as soon as possible. Having developed an advanced peaceful nuclear programme,
we understand the criticality of adherence to all safety and security standards. We are
committed to the promotion of the safety and security culture both at the international and
domestic level. To these ends the national regulatory authority continued its outreach
activities towards the national nuclear industry with the focus on sharing of information and
lessons learned from the non-proliferation area. Several seminars were held on internal
compliance programmes, due diligence and risk assessment.
With respect to the implementation of commitments in the area of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and sharing of knowledge in the field of nuclear safety and security, the Czech
Republic considers establishment and efficient functioning of an independent regulatory
authority to be the fundamental condition for an effective regulatory infrastructure.
The Czech Republic continues to share nuclear knowledge and information through its
participation in the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme and also belongs to regular net
contributors to this fund. To these ends the Czech Republic hosts various workshops,
seminars and training courses, which are either hosted on a regional basis or are tailored
specifically for particular States and their needs.
The Czech Republic actively participates in and financially contributes to the Peaceful Uses
Initiative organized under the auspices of the IAEA in order to set an example that responsible
exercise of the right to peaceful use of nuclear energy can yield numerous societal benefits in
non-energy nuclear applications, such as advancements in cancer treatment, water sanitation,
providing nutrition, and others.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, allow me to express my sincere belief that under the able leadership of the
IAEA we can attain further progress in achieving the goals of the Action Plan related to the
cluster III issues and that the IAEA has the necessary prerequisites to take over a follow-up to
the Nuclear Security Summit process upon its final meeting in 2016.
Thank you for your kind attention.

