CZECH REPUBLIC

Statement by

Mr. Ladislav STEINHUBEL
First Secretary of the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic
to the UN

at

Third session of the Preparatory Committee to the NPT
Cluster III and Article X issues

New York, 5 May 2014

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,
1. First of all I would like to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your tireless efforts in leading
us through all caveats of this meeting. Let me assure you of full cooperation of my
country's delegation in order to achieve expeditiously a consensus on those issues that
are uniting us all. While fully subscribing to the EU Statements, I would like now to
touch upon some items that have special importance for us nationally.
2. I would like to emphasize that the Czech Republic acknowledges the indisputable
right of every country for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Having developed an
advanced peaceful nuclear programme, we understand the criticality of adherence to
all safety and security standards. We are committed to the promotion of the safety
culture at the international level. I believe that my country sets a great example in this
regard.
3. Under the NPT, peaceful uses are one of the three indivisible pillars of the Treaty.
The Czech Republic has always been working hard towards the fullest implementation
of Art. IV .1, namely
"contributing alone or together with other States or
international organizations to the further development of the applications of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon
States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration for the need" of the developing
areas of the world."
4. We are proud to point out that since 2010, the Czech Republic has been among the 18
States that are united in the ,Peaceful Uses Initiative". Thus, we would like to
demonstrate that the IAEA activities are not restricted just to nuclear energy,
safeguards and inspections even though we consider them as the core prerequisite for
achieving the nuclear disarmament. The other part of peaceful uses relevant to the
NPT relates to non-power uses of nuclear energy. With relatively limited financial
resources we can achieve a lot in the field of treating cancer, water sanitation,
providing alimentation, secure crops etc. We firmly believe that this contributes
directly to the achievement of certain Millennium Development Goals such as
eradication of poverty and hunger. child health, environmental sustainability and
global partnerships.
5. In 2013 the Czech Republic made a regular contribution of 150 thousand US dollars
and more than 120 thousand EUR to the fund of the Technical Cooperation Program.
Last year we contributed almost 280 thousand EUR in total for three extra budgetary
projects related to radiation therapy services and establishing 3D conformal
radiotherapy as well as to ageing management and remaining life-time assessment.
6. The Czech Republic proudly contributes to strengthening safeguards and IAEA's
capacities through the Member States Support Programme under which we host on an
annual basis, among other projects, the Comprehensive Inspection Exercise at LWRs
and Nuclear Materials Accounting in Action course. The most sought after course is
undoubtedly the Technical visit to Uranium Mines. Furthermore, the Czech Nuclear
Research Institute in Rez is in the process of qualification for IAEA's Environmental
Network Laboratories (NWAL) for Bulk Analysis.

7. Along with other developed countries, the Czech Republic supports IAEA' s effort to
provide technical support to its member states. In 2013 various organizations in the
Czech Republic provided 16 long-term fellowships and 18 short-term scientific visits
for foreign experts. Courses focusing on advanced nuclear technologies in medicine,
radiation protection, nuclear waste management and training courses on Czech
research reactors are highly sought after.
Mr. Chairman,
8. In connection with peaceful uses, we would like to draw attention to their conditions
set out by the Treaty, i.e. in conformity with articles I and II. In this regard, it is
therefore valid to stress the need for the universalisation of export controls and their
implementation in line with UNSCR 1540 (2004). Only the universal application of
these norms can facilitate more reliable environment for transfers of technologies and
dual use goods and prevent undue misunderstandings in that connection.
9. Moreover, we would like to point out that in our view the conformity with articles I
and II is also relevant to conditions of withdrawal from the Treaty. Therefore, it is of
utmost importance for us that the withdrawal is communicated to the Security Council
and the General Assembly of the United Nations and all items and benefits gained
during the State's NPT membership must not be in any circumstances used other than
in peaceful ways. The relevant part of the State's nuclear programme must remain
subject to all lifetime IAEA safeguards with the Additional Protocol and supplier
states should decide whether the items received shall be returned or dismantled.
Mr. Chairman,
10. The Czech Republic underlines the importance of international cooperation in order to
strengthen nuclear safety. Only universal accession to all relevant conventions as soon
as possible can ensure a satisfactory level of nuclear safety. We urge all states to
become parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS), the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its Amendment. We strongly
believe that the principle of peer reviews represents an extremely useful instrument for
strengthening and enhancing the effectiveness of the national regulatory infrastructure
for nuclear and radiation safety.
1 I. The Czech Republic has been always an honest advocate of multilateral cooperation
and approaches in contribution to key physics and technology issues as well as
innovative concepts of peaceful uses. The international community should focus more
than ever on those multilateral projects that could lead to new environmentally safe
and reliable sources of energy. The International Thermonuclear Energy Reactor
Programme could certainly serve as one of the models of such cooperation.
12. In conclusion, allow me to express my sincere belief that under able leadership we can
attain further progress in achieving the goals of the Action Plan related to the cluster
III issues.
Thank you for your kind attention.
(Check against delivery)

