

Mr. Chairman,
France fully adheres to the statement made on behalf of the European Union on this
chapter.
I would like to add a few items from a national standpoint to this statement.
Mr. Chairman,
All States have the right to benefit from civil nuclear applications when they comply
with their international obligations and pursue nuclear activities for peaceful
purposes in good faith. This is one of the keys which has enabled the adherence of
nearly all States to the Treaty. The development of civil nuclear energy is an essential
component in meeting the objectives of the NPT and in strengthening the
international non-proliferation regime.
France, in application of article IV of the NPT, is actively working towards the
responsible development of nuclear energy, and advocates the strictest standards in
terms of safety, security and non-proliferation. France has extensive expertise in all
fields of nuclear technology, from research to electricity generation, from uranium
ore conversion to waste management and is actively working to develop the nuclear
energy of the future based on research into fourth-generation reactors and the
construction of the ITER reactor, which is continuing at the Cadarache site as part of
an international project.
There are currently 435 nuclear reactors in operation across the world, with 72 more
under construction. Ten new builds began last year. Given these numbers, which
confirm the prospects of growth in worldwide nuclear power capacity over the
coming decades, France would like to restate here its commitment to safe,
sustainable and responsible nuclear activities, and plans to continue its contribution
to this field through a number of international cooperation initiatives and its
continuing and increasing support to the work of the IAEA in promoting nuclear
energy.

6

In particular, I would like to draw your attention to a topic which is important to all
of us:that of states accessing nuclear energy for the first time, which, based on limited
experience, are going to develop substantial nuclear energy capacity very quickly over
the coming decades.Looking at an important number of either developing or
emerging States acceding at the same time to nuclear energy represents an unknown
challenge for the international community. These countries must meet a four-fold
challenge:
-

A growing demand for low cost energy
The limitation of CO₂ emissions
Compliance with enhanced safety and security requirements
Taking into account public acceptance

These States do not have the luxury of a 20-year timeframe to devote to bringing to
maturity the technical and institutional skills. To manage their nuclear power
programme, they need to build or acquire very fast these capacities, and as a
consequence, they will mobilize simultaneously the international cooperation tools
and those of the supplier’s countries. This presents us with new challenges.It means it
is necessary and urgent to deploy much more in-depth international cooperation than
in the past, on a number of levels:institutional, scientific and technical, as well as
legal.
In this regard, the development of human resources and training in the nuclear field
represents, for France, a major challenge for a responsible development of nuclear
energy. My country particularly welcomes the holding in Vienna mid- May of an
international conference on the development of human resources for nuclear
programmes, which will give an opportunity to Member States to reinforce their
cooperation in this essential matter. France and the IAEA have also concluded
practical arrangements which will give to the French entities a framework to increase
their support to Agency’s activities in the field of theoretical and practical training
dedicated to nuclear energy. France is willing to think on these issues with the most
interested countries. We should identify together what we can do better to give a
positive answer to these requests either during the IAEA’s General Conference or
during the NPT review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
The scale of the accident which occurred at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant more than three years ago dramatically confirmed the need to improve nuclear
safety and ensure it is maintained at the highest level throughout the world.Its
consequences continue to make headlines and show us, if any further proof were
needed, that this is an essential condition for the responsible use of nuclear energy
and its acceptance by the general public.
France believes that it will take several more years to learn all lessons from the
Fukushima accident, and that the efforts of all stakeholders must be sustained.By the
end of this year, the IAEA will finalize a comprehensive report on the accident, taking
into account all the lessons already learnt, which will certainly make a significant

7

contribution in this regard.France has mobilized its experts so they can play an active
role in the drafting of this report.
More than ever, the action plan of the IAEA on nuclear safety is an essential part of
the process of gathering feedback being conducted by the international
community.With a view to transparency, in December 2012 France released a
breakdown of the implementation of the IAEA plan in France, and submitted it to the
2013 Preparatory Committee as a working document. An updated version of this
working document has been distributed during this Prepcom.
In particular, my delegation supports the development and widespread
implementation of international peer review missions, and would like to remind
States of their commitment, in compliance with the action plan, to host at least one
OSART (Operational Safety Review Team) mission by the end of 2014, and to publish
its findings.
For its part, this year France will host another IRRS (International Regulatory Review
Service) mission, following the one in 2006, as well as two OSART missions, one
focusing on the Flamanville nuclear power plant and the other on the Engineering
and Production Department (DPI - Direction Production Ingénierie) of Electricité de
France (EDF).
Mr. Chairman,
The necessary improvement of the international safety framework also requires the
strengthening of international conventions on nuclear safety, including conventions
on nuclear civil liability, and their application.
In this regard, we would like to commend the work of the Review Meeting of the
Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety which was held last month
and in particular the decision to hold a diplomatic conference in a year’s time to
assess the Swiss proposal for an amendment to the CNS.We encourage all contracting
Parties to implement on a voluntary basis the decisions adopted by this sixth review
Conference.
The establishment of a global nuclear civil liability regime is a major objective of the
IAEA action plan on nuclear safety. Last August, the USA and France signed a joint
declaration which affirms our commitment to contributing to the development of a
global nuclear civil liability regime, based on existing conventions between States, for
the fair compensation of victims of nuclear accidents.
France encourages all the relevant States to adhere to strengthened international
nuclear civil liability instruments.This includes, amongst others, the Paris
Convention (alongside the Brussels Convention) and the Vienna Convention, in their
revised versions, linked by the Joint Protocol, and the Convention on Supplementary
Compensation for Nuclear Damage.We hope that this joint initiative with the USA
will make it possible to accelerate the development of a global nuclear civil liability
regime based on existing conventions between States.

8

In particular, France considers that the Paris and Brussels Conventions and the
Vienna Convention, in their revised versions, as well as the Joint Protocol relating to
the application of the Vienna and Paris Conventions, constitute a suitable system for
the compensation of nuclear damage.I would like to note that the French National
Assembly has just passed the act to ratify the Joint Protocol. The French instrument
of ratification may therefore now be deposited.
Mr. Chairman,
In the field of nuclear security, in compliance with the commitment made by the
Prime Minister at the Seoul Summit in April 2012, France, which hosted an IPPAS
(International Physical Protection Advisory Service) mission in November 2011,
organized in December 2013, in collaboration with the IAEA, the first international
seminar devoted to lessons learned from, and the assessment of, this type of mission.
Furthermore, France is especially involved in the issue of the safety and security of
radioactive sources.We will continue to support the international efforts deployed by
the IAEA to improve the safe and secure management of radioactive sources. For
French origin sources, we are pursuing all necessary measures to secure, or, if
deemed necessary, repatriate sources, in cooperation with the Agency.An operation to
repatriate two high-activity sources was conducted last December in Sudan, in
cooperation with the IAEA and Sudanese authorities. Other operations are being
prepared.
As suggested by the President of the French Republic during the summit in The
Hague, France sincerely hopes for the creation of a structure grouping together
countries which export high-activity radioactive sources, to define together rules and
good practice, and in particular agree on the principle of returning disused sources to
the supplier.
Mr. Chairman,
The nuclear sector has an essential role to play outside the production of electricity,
in the fields of healthcare, agriculture, the environment and the management of water
resources, to promote the development of the poorest countries and meet their real
needs.France would like to pay tribute to the driving role played by the IAEA in this
area. By promoting nuclear science and applications and through its programme of
technical cooperation, the Agency actively contributes to the fulfilment of the
Millennium Development Goals.
To conclude, Mr. Chairman.
The responsible development of nuclear energy is a major challenge for the future of
our planet.We must continue to work to promote this development, which will enable
the international community to meet the sizeable economic, environmental and
human challenges which lie ahead.Equally, now more than ever, nuclear safety must
be an absolute priority and guide our actions in terms of the development of nuclear
energy.This must be our collective priority.
9

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

10

