
PEACEFUL USES

Mr Chairman ,
13. The French Delegation fully supports the statement made by the European Union. I
would like to make the following observations in my national capacity .

Mr. Chairman,
14. The development of civilian nuclear cooperation is one of the fundamental objectives of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons . Any State carrying in good faith
nuclear activities for peaceful purposes must be able to benefit from the provisions of
Article IV of the Treaty , in accordance with the highest standards of non-proliferation ,
safety and security.

5

15. France, who has recognized expertise in all nuclear technologies, for energy production
as well as many other applications, is fully committed to the implementation of these
provisions . Its action in this regard are implemented in a multilateral framework, notably
through the IAEA, as well as in an active policy of bilateral cooperation . All French
nuclear civilian facilities are under Euratom or IAEA safeguards.

Mr Chairman,

16. In the energy field, nuclear makes a substantial contribution to global electricity supply
needs. It will remain a significant component of the global energy mix whatever the
scenarios envisaged. Actually, an increase in the world's installed nuclear capacity will
be necessary to achieve the Paris agreement on climate, to limit to 2 ° C the rise in the
temperature of the planet.

17. Over the past two years, France has carried out the restructuring of its nuclear industry,
which is now completed. Along with EDF, two new entities were created and have taken
over from AREVA : "ORANO" specializes in activities related to the fuel cycle.
Framatome focuses on the design and supply of nuclear equipment.

18. The French nuclear sector is emerging stronger from this process and will consolidate its
leading position in nuclear technologies, both for its national needs and in the context of
its international cooperation.

19. In full accordance with the provisions of Article IV of the NPT, France is building strategic
partnerships with a large number of States interested in the development of nuclear
energy . The French experience of this type of cooperation, which rely by nature on the
commitment of national authorities, shows that they require an intergovernmental
agreements framework. Such agreements make it possible to set the objectives, scope

6

and conditions for joint activities and exchanges between the industrial or scientific
stakeholders.

20. At the time when more than thirty new States wish to develop a nuclear power program,
France and its partners therefore wanted to share their experience in this field by
submitting to this preparatory committee a working document on the framework for civil
nuclear cooperation.

Mr Chairman,
21. The benefits of the atom go far beyond the sole purpose of generating electricity, but
cover an extremely wide spectrum of potential applications. I am therefore very much
looking forward to the forthcoming IAEA of a Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Science
and Technology next November. This will be an opportunity for us to take stock of recent
progress and chart the prospects for new developments for health, food, agriculture and
cultural heritage preservation . France intends to participate actively to this event.


22. I would like to recall in this context that France is strongly engaged in IAEA programs for
knowledge transfer and skills development. My country is one of the main contributors to
the technical cooperation program of the Agency. France is involved in many of the
collaboration tools proposed by the Agency, such as "ICERR" for research reactors,
"Internet Reactor Laboratory" for online training, or the network of "collaborative
centers" .

24. My delegation considers that the effectiveness of these different tools of the Agency
would benefit from greater integration . Thus, the "ICERR" label could be better promoted
by the Agency towards States wishing to develop projects around research reactors
within the framework of the technical cooperation program . Similarly, the linkage of this
program with the IAEA's nuclear security plan would make it possible, for example, to
increase efforts to secure radioactive sources, to which France also takes an important
part.

25. As you know , France attaches great importance to strengthening nuclear safety and
security at international level. They both contribute supporting the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. France will thus continue to actively support the IAEA's assistance
programs and the Agency's central role in these two areas .

Thank you Mr Chairman.

8

