As one of the holders of enrichment technology Germany has followed the evolving debate on multilateral access to nuclear fuel with especially high interest.
Although Germany considers it of utmost importance that nuclear energy is applied in the safest and secure manner, Germany is not in agreement with intentions to further limit the rights to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for states which fulfil their obligations of the NPT.
The right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as enshrined in the NPT Article IV must remain untouched.
Germany is of the opinion that the debate on nuclear fuel supply must not be used to introduce new restrictions.
In its analysis Germany came to the conclusion that mere assurances of supply are not enough as they might at the end remain mere assurances on paper. Germany has therefore developed and further refined the proposal of a ..Multilateral Enrichment Sanctuary", which was introduced by Foreign Minister Steinmeier in September 2006 and circulated as proposal with INFCIRC 704 in May 2007.
The Multilateral Enrichment Sanctuary Project includes:
■	A commercially run enrichment plant
■	owned by interested states or their industry,
■	situated in a special territory, controlled and administered by the IAEA, where a host state transfers functional immunities to the IAEA to such an extent that the operation of the enrichment plant will be protected from any potential interference by the host state or others.
MESP does not contain any restrictions to the rights enshrined in Article IV of the NPT. It creates an opportunity to share on a non-discriminatory basis economic applications of enrichment technology. With the general interest to strengthen the NPT Germany considers nondiscriminatory access to nuclear fuel as essential for the future development of nuclear energy and non-proliferation.
Already the mere existence of multilateral installations and cooperation between states will help to build trust and thereby support non-proliferation. Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom organised a conference on Nuclear Fuel Supply in Berlin on 17/18 April 2008, which was opened by DG ElBaradei and Foreign Minister Steinmeier on behalf of the organising Governments. During the conference we sensed an increasing interest to discuss this matter without any preconditions.
As MESP does not contain the foregoing of any rights as a condition, we felt encouraged to introduce a working paper on MESP at this NPT PrepCom. In this context we would be pleased if the IAEA could brief this Committee on the current state of the debate on fuel supply assurances in general. Germany is of the opinion that not one guarantee system or one multilateral approach will fit all needs. Germany considers MESP as one approach amongst others. Germany considers the IAEA to be the key institution for assisting all interested states to gain access to nuclear energy without increasing at the same time the risks of proliferation.