German Statement on Cluster Ill
NPT Preparatory Committee
Agenda Item "Cluster 3 issues", 2 May 2018

Mr. Chairman,

First of all, I would like to align myself with the Statement by
the EU and the positions of the NPDI regarding pillar three of
the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,

the third pillar is one of the reasons why a functioning and
fully effective Non-Proliferation Treaty is benefitting all of us,
even those amongst us who do not opt for the use of nuclear
energy.

Art. IV of the NPT clearly states that all States Parties to the
NPT have the inalienable right to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes in conformity with their international
obligations under Articles I, II and Ill of the NPT.

1

Germany fully respects that right and reiterates its willingness
to cooperate with States that meet their nuclear nonproliferation obligations and that wish to develop a
transparent civil nuclear programme that meets the highest
standards of safety, security and non-proliferation .

Mr. Chairman,

although there are many benefits of peaceful uses, it has also
become clear that the use of nuclear energy involves
considerable risks as well. These risks concern all of us. The
grave consequences of nuclear accidents as they happened in
Chernobyl and Fukushima have global dimensions. The
th

Chernobyl accident occurred on 26 April 1986 - almost
exactly 32 years ago. Apart from the immediate disastrous
consequences for the whole region, the international
community is still today dealing with the legacy of that
accident - just to mention the enormous task to construct
the New Safe Confinement and the Interim Storage Facility
and their enormous costs, essentially financed through the
Chernobyl Shelter Fund. The Fukushima accident in March
2011 illustrated another risk dimension and made it clear that
even risk scenarios may be challenged by the unforeseen.
Keeping these enormous and incalculable risks in mind,
Germany will phase out the production of nuclear power by
2022. In the framework of the Berlin Energy Transition
2

Dialogue, which took place a couple of weeks ago for the
fourth time, Germany advocates for a global change in energy
policy under the slogan "towards a global Energiewende" this German expression being used on purpose!
Our message in the NPT framework is: Those who do not opt
for the use of nuclear energy must be assured that those who
do maintain the highest nuclear safety standards. Hence, they
carry an existential responsibility .

Mr. Chairman,

maintaining satisfactory levels of nuclear security is a global
challenge, because the threat of nuclear terrorism has
reached global dimensions . No one should assume that the
threat only concerns those who actually use nuclear energy.
Terrorism does not respect borders. So-called failed states
add to the risks of nuclear materials falling out of regulatory
control, with non-state-actors ready to revert to nuclear
smuggling and nuclear terrorism.
A robust global nuclear security architecture enables all
countries to reap the peaceful benefits of the atom. It plays
an instrumental role in reducing the risks of an incident of
nuclear terrorism which would have negative repercussions
on peaceful nuclear cooperation everywhere.

3

Nuclear security is thus an essential element to peaceful use
and should not be viewed as an impediment to the spread of
such use, but rather as a catalyst. All of those engaged in
peaceful nuclear activities want assurance that they are not
facing undue risks from nuclear accidents or malicious efforts.
Implementing international standards for nuclear safety and
security helps provide the assurance that the risk is managed,
thereby facilitating international cooperation in peaceful
nuclear activities.
Public support of nuclear technology is critical to the
continued development and fullest possible exchange of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and for access to
applications of radiological material, inter alia for cancer
treatment.

Mr. Chairman,

Germany commends the IAEA for its crucial and invaluable
work regarding the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including
through its safeguards-system.
The German safeguards support program for the IAEA covers
not only the development of equipment and procedures, but
also the development of safeguards approaches, training of
Agency inspectors, development of safeguards evaluation

4

methods and the appointment of cost-free experts to the
IAEA.
Germany as well supports the IAEA's Technical Cooperation
Program and Peaceful Uses Initiative as effective means to
promote the benefits of nuclear technology in areas such as
human health, agriculture, water management and industrial
applications as well as energy to meet the development
needs of IAEA Member States.
Germany highly values the laboratories in Seibersdorf as a
leading research and capacity building institution . Germany
contributed to the enhancement and modernization of the
laboratories with substantial extra budgetary funds to the
ReNual and ReNual + programmes.

Germany is currently the fourth largest contributor to the
IAEA's budget and has been operating its IAEA safeguards
support program for 40 years. Germany is also a major
voluntary contributor to the Nuclear Security Fund. In
addition to Germany's share in the contribution

of the

European Union, we supported the NSF bilaterally with about
7,5 Mio.€.
Through the Nuclear Security Fund, Germany supported the
work of the Agency itself as well as in partner countries with a
special focus on capacity building for the security of
radioactive sources and the protection from cyber attacks
against nuclear facilities. Much work needs still to be done.
The IAEA's nuclear security funding needs to be put on a firm,
5

reliable footing and its mandate adapted to address evolving
nuclear security threats. We support the IAEA's central role in
the global nuclear security architecture and we do hope that
the momentum can be maintained also in the NPT context.
The positive effects of an active and sustainable
implementation

of the Third Pillar are major assets of the

NPT, which should be highly appreciated as a catalyst or
motivator for positive developments in other areas.

Thank you very much for your attention.

6

