Check against delivery!

STATEIVIENT OF HUNGARY
by
Ambassador Dr. György Molnár

Special Representative of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
for Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation

at the First Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III issues

United Nations
Vienna, 10 May 2017

Mr. Chairman,
Hungary associates itself with the statement of the EU on cluster III issues, and with the
relevant elements of the working paper of the Vienna Group of 10.
As a country with an active peaceful nuclear program with plans for further expansion of its
capacities, Hungary recognizes that all States parties have an inalienable right for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy without discrimination and in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the NPT At the same time, we attach outmost importance to the full implementation of
safeguards as well as all aspects of nuclear safety and security that are not impediments but
enablers for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and also essential for maintaining public support.
Consequently, we fully support the invaluable work of the IAEA, and the central role it plays
in this field including through its Technical Cooperation Programme.
Mr. Chairman,
IAEA safety standards provide a complex system of fundamental principles, requirements and
guides for guaranteeing nuclear safety. We have a keen interest in the achievement of the
highest possible standards in all aspects of nuclear energy. These standards, which we are
fully committed to, can only be maintained by ensuring the highest level of nuclear safety
worldwide, We are therefore ready to provide assistance and cooperate with interested
partners.
Nuclear safety and security are mutually reinforcing, and thus should be regulated in a
synergetic manner at all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. Hungary recognizes that nuclear
security remains the responsibility of states, however, it is our firm conviction that
international cooperation is essential in this area as well. Therefore, we encourage all states to
take advantage of IAEA advisory services, including the International Physical Protection
Advisory Service (IPPAS) and share best practices and experiences in this area.
In line with the Ministerial Declaration adopted by the IAEA International Conference on
Nuclear Security held last December, one of our present priorities is to work out and finalize
IAEA’s 2018-2021 Nuclear Security Plan. We are pleased that the Amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) entered into force last
year. Now we have to focus on its universalization, ensure full implementation and start
preparations for the Review Conference to be held in 2021. To enable the IAEA to undertake
its complex nuclear-security related activities we need to ensure that it has reliable and
sufficient technical, human and financial resources allocated through assessed contributions to
the regular budget.
Hungary also takes part in initiatives such as the Global Partnership Against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Nuclear Security Contact Group that play a supplementary but important
role in strengthening the nuclear security architecture centered on the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion let me voice our strong expectation that the so called “Vienna issues” of the
NPT will be given appropriate weight in the report of the Preparatory Committee.

