Check against delivery!

STATEMENT OF HUNGARY
by
Ambassador Dr Gyorgy Molnar

Special Representative of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
for Arms Control, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation

at the Second Preparatory Com.mittee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III issues

United Nations
Geneva, 1 May 2018

Mr. Chainnan ,
Hungary associates itself with the cluster III statement of the EU and the working paper
submitted by the Vienna Group of 10.
As I stated in the general debate, Hungary - a country with an active peaceful nuclear
program with plans for further expansion - recognizes that all States parties have an
inalienable right for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in confonnity with the relevant
provisions of the NPT. It means that States parties are entitled to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy only in strict compliance with the non-proliferation and verification provisions of the
Treaty. In this respect, we attach outmost importance to the full implementation of IAEA
safeguards that play a critical role in maintaining confidence in the peaceful nature of nuclear
activities. Consequently, we fully support the invaluable work of the IAEA, including through
its Technical Cooperation Programme which also contributes to the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear safety and security are not impediments but enablers for peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. They are mutually reinforcing, and thus should be regulated in a synergetic manner at
all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. Hungary recognizes that nuclear safety and security
remains the responsibility of states, however, it is our firm conviction that international
cooperation is essential in this field as well. That is why we put special emphasis on the Third
Part of the Action Plan adopted by the 2010 Review Conference, which addresses the safe and
secure development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the central role the IAEA plays
in it.
Concerning nuclear safety the IAEA standards provide us with a complex system of
fundamental principles, requirements and guides. Hungary has a keen interest in the
achievement of the highest possible standards in all aspects of nuclear safety, which is also
essential for maintaining public support for the use of nuclear energy . These standards, which
we are fully committed to, can only be maintained by ensuring the highest level of nuclear
safety worldwide. We are therefore ready to provide assistance and cooperate with interested
partners. We note with satisfaction the interest expressed by a number of states 111 our
experience and know-how in nuclear power plant operation and maintenance .
The IAEA also plays a central coordinating role in ensuring adequate nuclear security.
Therefore, we encourage all states to take advantage of IAEA advisory services, including the
International Physical Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS). To enable the IAEA to undertake
its complex nuclear security related activities we also need to ensure that it has reliable and
sufficient technical , human and financial resources allocated through assessed contributions to
the regular budget.
Concerning nuclear security we consider ensuring the full implementation of IAEA' s 20182021 Nuclear Security Plan as a priority. Another important task ahead of us is to prepare for
the Review Conference of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material
(CPPNM) to be held in 2021 .

-2-

Mr. Chainnan ,
Hungary also takes an active part in initiatives such as the Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destmction (GP), the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) and the Nuclear Security Contact Group (NSCG) that play a
supplementary but important role in strengthening the nuclear security architecture centered
on the IAEA. As part of our contribution to these efforts, in mid-April we hosted a
radiological source security and theft response workshop in Budapest under the auspices of
the GICNT, which was attended by over 90 participants from 25 countries.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion let me voice our strong expectation that the so called "Vienna issues" of the
NPT will be given appropriate weight in the report of the Preparatory Committee.

- 3-

·,

