Please check against delivery

Statement by
The Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia

at the Second Session of The Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 3: Peaceful uses of nuclear energy

Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018
1

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered in this Cluster by the
Group of Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement Parties to the NPT, and its
relevant working papers.
We would like to stress that the right to use and develop nuclear energy and
technologies should not be restricted in any way for the purpose of preventing
proliferation- The full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of Article IV of
the NPT plays a vital role in achieving the Treaty's objective.
Furthermore, to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy, Indonesia is of.the view
that as a fundamental principle, preferential treatment should be given to the nonnuclear weapons States Parties to the Treaty. Such preferential treatment should
also take into account the particular needs of developing countries.
We would like to highlight that peaceful use of nuclear energy also supports the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals, taking into account its economic,
environmental, health and agricultural benefits. We also believe that peaceful use of
nuclear energy is one of the policy options to support economic development,
through secure energy supply.
Mr. Chairman,

·

As an essential element for the implementation of Article IV of the NPT, Indonesia
fully support the IAEA Technical Cooperation and encourages all parties to the Treaty
to continue and enhance their support for and contributions to this program.
Within this framework, Indonesia has consistently worked to enhance its support for
and contribution, through regular contributions to the Technical Cooperation Fund,
government cost-sharing and other extra budgetary contributions, such as the IAEA
Peaceful Uses Initiative.
Indonesia recently signed a Practical Arrangement with the IAEA to enhance
technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC) and strengthen southsouth cooperation, capacity building, and further plans to channel the contribution to
support least developed countries both in the Pacific and Africa region.
Indonesia looks forward to the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Science and
Technology scheduled for the end of this year. We hope this event will further
promote and raise awareness of the importance of nuclear science technology for
development.

Mr. Chairman,

On the issue of export control, Indonesia stresses that the attainment of nonproliferation objectives, including through export control mechanism, must be
pursued in a comprehensive, balanced, and inclusive manner under applicable
international law, and without hampering import and export of dual-use goods and
technology .
2

Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate its believe that this PrepCom will reaffirm
the validity of Article IV in ensuring that no State Party is limited in the exercise of its
rights to research, produce and use nuclear energy and technologies for peaceful
purposes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

