Mr. Chairman,
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the Indonesian delegation on behalf of the NAM States parties to the NPT on this cluster. We would like to add the following:
Indonesia believes that Article IV of the NPT fully guarantees the inalienable right of developing countries to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. This right constitutes one of the fundamental objectives of the NPT. Article IV is actually part of a political bargain within the NPT context. In return of NNWS giving up their options to acquire nuclear weapons, NWS promised to work towards nuclear disarmament and all States parties shall cooperate in the further development of nuclear energy.
The provision of Article IV was specifically crafted to preclude any attempt to reinterpret the NPT that fully recognized the right of each State party to develop nuclear energy. As long as it is aimed and used for peaceful purposes and under the full comprehensive safeguards of the IAEA, this right should be fully respected by all States without any interference.
Indonesia would like to underscore that Article IV also allows all States parties to participate to the fullest possible in the transfer of nuclear equipment, materials, scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes with a view to achieving the largest benefits and applying pertinent elements of sustainable development in then* activities.
Mr. Chairman,
We continue to witness the rising expectations for nuclear energy in different parts of the world, especially for generating electricity. As a country with more than 230 million population and taking into account the current situation of huge energy needs, Indonesia has opted to use nuclear energy as part of its energy mix to meet its rising demand for energy in the future.
At the same time, the increasing demand of energy which has generated the need to use nuclear energy, in turn, has caused a significant demand on the assurances of nuclear fuel supply and the nuclear fuel cycle.
Indonesia concurs with the view that the issue of assurances of nuclear fuel supply is complex, multidimensional and multifaceted in nature, with social, economic,
political, security and legal implication. Therefore, this issue should be further studied in a comprehensive and holistic manner before being considered further by the IAEA's policy making organs.
We believe that nuclear fuel assurances are of utmost importance for the energy security of countries operating nuclear power plants. Indonesia appreciates all initiatives by the IAEA and member states to explore solution for fuel assurances, to the extent that they are consistent with the existing non-proliferation regime.
Nevertheless, any multilateral solution proposed for nuclear fuel assurances has to be considered only as an alternative practical solution to assure fuel supply at an affordable price, without in any way neglecting the security aspect and without restricting the inalienable rights of all states to develop all aspects of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes.
Mr. Chairman,
While the growing importance of energy security brings a rising demand for nuclear energy and assurance of nuclear fuel supply, we note with concern a new trend to restrict the utilization of certain nuclear technology for peaceful purposes by differentiating between "sensitive" and "non-sensitive" technology. Indonesia is of the view that all aspects of nuclear technology are basically sensitive. Due to its sensitive nature, all nuclear activities should be subject to safeguard and verification as stipulated in the Treaty and, therefore, none of them should be discouraged based on the grounds of their alleged "sensitivity".
For NNWS, especially developing countries, the mam issue is how to utilize peaceful nuclear technology to the fullest extent to attain sustainable socio-economic development. Hence, concerns related to nuclear non-proliferation shall not in any way restrict the inalienable right of all states to develop all aspects of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes.
In conclusion, Indonesia believes that the IAEA is a technical agency with the core function of promoting nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes. Therefore, IAEA is in a veiy position the ensure that this core statutory function could be effectively performed and its works, as well as the works of its policy making organs, on this core function, should not be undermined by attempts to place emphasize on political issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.