
Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, my delegation wishes to emphasize the importance of ensuring the inalienable rights of all States Parties under the relevant provisions of the Treaty to the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy. These right must be fully protected at all times and no State Party should be limited in the exercise of this right in accordance with the Treaty. It is also important to recognize that each State Party's choices and decisions in the civilian applications of nuclear technology should be respected. In other words, nothing in the Treaty should be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the States Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. In these activities, preferential treatment should be given to the non-nuclear states parties to the treaty that have concluded and implemented safeguards agreements with the IAEA, including the Additional Protocol.
For over two decades, Indonesia has been committed to the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy through the development and strengthening of links and cooperation, both on bilateral and multilateral levels especially with the IAEA. Through the assistance provided by its Technical Assistance Program, we have successfully applied nuclear techniques in many areas of national development programs including agriculture, industry, health care and environmental protection. In view of the plan to introduce nuclear power in the country as a strategic component to obtain an optimal long term mix in a sustainable national energy supply system in Indonesia, it is our intention to further strengthen such cooperation not only with the Agency but also with countries that pioneered the application of this segment of nuclear technology.
In the field of food and agriculture the program of activities has resulted among others, in the production of many new varieties of useful food crops with desired specific characteristics, in better soil fertilization techniques and in more effective methods to combat plant and animal diseases. Significant achievements have also been made ir the

development and use of isotopes and radiation techniques in the diagnostics and therapy of human diseases. The use of radioactive tracers and radiation sources have contributed significantly in the optimization of industrial processes, in the production and testing of specific goods, such as new materials. Nuclear techniques have also been successfully used in the identification, dispersion and deposition of pollutants of air, water and soil in Indonesia.
Mr. Chairman. Indonesia has a vital interest in promoting safe and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as they can provide significant contributions in the national development programs to achieve sustainable economic development. It is for this reason that Indonesia wishes to appeal to all States Parties, and in particular to the technologically developed nations, to pay serious attention to this third pillar of the N PT, and consequently provide tangible contributions to ensure success in achieving its objective. We are of the view that peaceful uses of nuclear energy constitutes one of the most important pillar of the NPT, because it addresses the real needs of the great majority of human beings, especially those living in third world, namely, to lead a decent and respectable life, in a peaceful and secure environment. In this context, we state that it is a contractual obligations of every state party to the NPT to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We therefore appeal to all Member States, and in particular to the donor countries, to strengthen the IAEA funding system for the IAEA Technical Cooperation be balanced against those needed for the implementation of the IAEA safeguards system.
In short, the IAEA provides a framework for cooperation within which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can take place and contribute to world peace, health and prosperity. It makes clear, however, that its assistance must not promote the acquisition of nuclear weapons because the dual nature of the technology involved can he used, as recent events demonstrate, for both peaceful and military purposes. Closing the loopholes by more stringent verification measures should be done through multilateral processes while preserving the right of all states to peaceful nuclear technology. However, it is important to refrain from punitive measures of a collective nature against those who have fulfilled their commitments and thereby deny their inalienable right of access to civilian applications of nuclear energy without discrimination.
Sustainable development through inter alia the technical cooperation programs of the IAEA is critically important to an overwhelming majority of developing states But these have been strapped for a number of years due to lack of sufficient funds. These activities can only be assured on a predictable basis when the financial requirements are adequately met. However, it bears reiteration that there has been a chronic imbalance between safeguards and promotional activities. We stress the importance to augment IAEA's resources for technical cooperation activities on an assured, predictable: and sufficient basis to meet objectives mandated by Article IV, paragraph 2 of the Treaty
Thank you, Mr. Chairman