Please check against delivery

Statement
by
H.E. I Gusti Agung Wesaka Puja
AmbassadorlPermanent Representative to the Republic of lndonesia
on behalf of the Group of Member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
a t the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 3
Vienna, 9 May 2012

My delegation fully associates itself with the statement made by the
Non-Aligned Movement States Party to the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,
lndonesia strongly believes that nuclear technology is an
indispensable component of the socio-economic and technological
development of people all around the world, especially those living in
developing parts of the world. It is the very rationale behind Article IV of the
NPT, which recognizes the inalienable rights of every State to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy.
Therefore, since we ratified the Treaty, we are of the firm belief that,
by obligating ourselves not to aspire for nuclear weapons, the Treaty will
guarantee our right to develop and use nuclear technology and energy for
the maximum benefit of our people. That said, we remain and will continue
to be of the view that the inalienable right of the States Parties to develop
and use nuclear energy and technologies for peaceful purposes should be
guaranteed and should by no means be restricted, and therefore, the
observance of Article IV of the NPT is absolutely vital.

If we are to believe that all pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing,
we have to avoid making a nonproliferation provision a pretext to deny such
inalienable rights. Instead, we must further promote the development and
utilization of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes in a manner that
takes care of any possible proliferation concerns. In this regard, Indonesia
strongly supports the research and development for proliferation-resistant
technology. As an example of this, Indonesian experts have, among other
things, recently successfully converted our research reactor from using
HEU to LEU as a target in the production of radioisotopes. While technical
feasibility of this conversion has been proven, the economic feasibility
remains to be evaluated.

Mr. Chairman,
While being aware of the fact that the development and use of
nuclear technologies that are essential for human progress might involve a
risk of proliferation, we cannot share the opinion of those who see an
automatic relation between the growing interest in nuclear technology and
a parallel increased risk of proliferation. Not only does such a view not
justify reinterpretation of the provisions of article IV, it also ignores the
historical fact that the threat of proliferation has been satisfactorily dealt
with over the last decades, more than other pillars of this Treaty, by the
promotion and the strengthening of the safeguards system as well as
safety and security.

Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear technology plays an important role in addressing many
aspects of Indonesia's national development programs, particularly in the
area of health, food and agriculture, water resources management,
environmental protection and industry. Therefore, we remain convinced of
the potential benefits of the responsible use of nuclear technologies and of
the synergies fostered by international co-operation in the nuclear field, for
which the work of the IAEA is of great importance.

Since becoming a member in 1957, lndonesia has participated
actively and constructively in the work of the IAEA. We take part actively in
and widely benefit from the IAEA Technical Cooperation Program. As a
result of its decades of technical cooperation with the IAEA, lndonesia is
now ready to share its achievements and experience in many areas of
nuclear technology for development with other countries.
lndonesia is strongly of the view that the Technical Cooperation of the
IAEA should be further supported by providing it with adequate resources.
Therefore, we call for all parties to the NPT to work collectively to
implement their commitment, as stipulated in Action 54 of the 2010 Review
Conference Outcome Document, to make every effort and to take practical
steps to ensure that IAEA resources for technical cooperation activities are
sufficient, assured and predictable. Despite the fact that the IAEA does not
have organic relations with the NPT, all States Parties of this Treaty that
are also members of the IAEA are morally obliged to translate the
commitment into an IAEA policy guidance.
Mr. Chairman,
We are continuously a firm believer in the principle of "safety first" in
all aspects of nuclear activities. Our national safety requirements and
standards gives no room for complacency. The safety record of our nuclear
activities and facilities over the decades, including the three research
reactors throughout the country, confirms that principle. We also support
global efforts to strengthen nuclear security worldwide. We take part in that
endeavor actively. Notwithstanding, it is our conviction that nuclear safety
and security should continue to be framed in the context of promoting
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.
Finally, we are of the view that this PrepCom should reaffirm the
validity of Article IV with a view to ensuring that the rights of all States
Parties are fully protected and that no State Party is limited in the exercise
of its rights to develop research, produce and use nuclear technologies for
peaceful purposes.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

