Please check against delivery

Statement by
The Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia

at the First Preparatory Committee Meeting
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 3: Peaceful uses of nuclear energy

Vienna, 2 – 12 May 2017

0

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation fully associates itself with the statement delivered in this
Cluster by the Group of Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
Parties to the NPT.
It is beyond doubt that peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology is
of great significance in addressing many aspects of our life in the areas
of health, food and agriculture, water resource management,
environmental protection and industry.
Taking into account of these benefits, we firmly believe that peaceful
uses of nuclear energy must be further promoted by all States Parties to
the NPT.
Bearing in mind the social, economic and environmental benefits
mentioned above, we would like to emphasize that the right to use and
develop nuclear energy and technologies should in no way be restricted
for the purpose of preventing proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,
The full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of Article IV of
the NPT has a crucial and indispensable role in achieving the objective
of the Treaty.
With due regard to all activities designed to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, Indonesia calls on all States Parties that as a
fundamental principle, preferential treatment shall be given to the nonnuclear-weapons States Parties to the Treaty. Such preferential
treatment should also take into account the particular needs of
developing countries.
Indonesia recognizes that the IAEA Technical Cooperation is a very
important and essential element for the implementation of Article IV of
the NPT.
Indonesia notes with interest that 13 out of 17 Sustainable Development
Goals relate directly to the Agency’s area of competence. These goals
could be fulfilled particularly through its Technical Cooperation
Programme for the benefit of all people.
Indonesia therefore encourages all parties to the Treaty to continue and
enhance their support and contributions to this program.
1

Indonesia for its part has continued its effort in enhancing support and
contribution to the Technical Cooperation programme, through its regular
contribution to the Technical Cooperation Fund, as well as through
government cost-sharing and other extra budgetary contributions,
including the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative.
Indonesia welcomes the Agency’s initiative to hold an International
Conference on Technical Cooperation at the end of this month. We hope
this event will further promote and increase awareness of the importance
and contribution of nuclear technology for development.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia hopes that under the framework of its three pillars, IAEA will
continue to play a key role as a catalyst for sustainable development,
through the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy while
minimizing the risk of proliferation.
In light of this, Indonesia is pleased to note the reiterated commitment by
the Director General of the IAEA to put more focus on this matter, in
which he summarized the expanded mandate of the Agency to “Atoms
for Peace and Development”.
Indonesia has committed itself to optimize the use of new and renewable
energy sources, including the option for possible use of nuclear energy in
the future, to secure energy supply that is needed for sustaining its
economic growth.
Indonesia welcomes the progress and achievements in the overarching
activities in nuclear science, technology and applications conducted by
the Agency, which have benefited Indonesia through these years.
At the same time, Indonesia supports the Agency’s activities in the areas
where we have developed sufficient advancement, such as in food,
agriculture and industrial applications.
Mr. Chairman,
The common objective to achieve effective and comprehensive nuclear
security was expressed at the highest level during the Nuclear Security
Summit in March 2016, followed by the IAEA International Conference of
Nuclear Security last December.
Addressing various global challenges in larger nuclear security is more
urgent than ever. The risk of the possibility of non-state actors having
2

access to nuclear weapons or to weapons-grade materials, only
heightens the need to expedite nuclear disarmament. Any use of nuclear
weapons will have catastrophic humanitarian consequences.
Indonesia, on its part, has ratified a number of key international legal
instruments related to nuclear security, including the Convention on
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its 2005
Amendment, and the International Convention on the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (ICSANT) in 2014. Indonesia is also in the
process of revising its law on nuclear energy, which will include all
aspects of nuclear security.
As we set our course in further strengthening nuclear security, we must
bear in mind that the inalienable right of States to develop nuclear
technology for peaceful uses should continue to benefit people and help
further development goals.
Indonesia calls upon States to ensure that measures to strengthen
nuclear security do not hamper international cooperation in the field of
peaceful nuclear activities, nor undermine the established priorities of the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme.
Finally, we are of the view that this PrepCom should reaffirm the validity
of Article IV with a view to ensuring that no State Party is limited in the
exercise of its rights to develop research, produce and use on nuclear
energy and technologies for peaceful purposes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

