Please Check Against Delivery

Statement by
Mr. Kamapradipta Isnomo.
Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Indonesia
to the United Nations

Main Committee III
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

New York, 5 May 2015
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
325 East 38 th Street, New York, NY 10016' Tel. (212) 972-8333 • Fax. (212) 972-9780
email: ptri@indonesiamission-ny.org
www.indonesiamission-ny.org

Mr. Chairman,
I congratulate you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of the
Committee. We are confident that under your able guidance, the work of
this Committee will be able to yield concrete outcomes, which will
advance the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation agenda.
Indonesia assures you of its cooperation and support in your important
work.
My delegation fully associates itself with the statement delivered by the
distinguished representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia firmly believes that it is crucial to keep a balanced,
comprehensive and non-discriminatory approach to the three pillars of the
NPT - nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. Therefore, Indonesia expects that the universality of the
NPT be made a priority and urges States which are not yet a party to
immediately accede to the NPT as non-nuclear weapon States.
On that note, Indonesia strongly believes that nuclear technology is an
indispensable component of the socio-economic and technological
development of people, particularly those living in developing countries.
Hence, Indonesia underlines the importance of the full realization of
inalienable right of every States to peaceful use if nuclear energy without
discrimination, in accordance with Article IV of the NPT.

1

The use of nuclear energy as one of the issues being deliberated in this
Committee is essential to the sustainable development of many
developing countries party to the NPT, including Indonesia. Thus,
Indonesian has committed itself to optimize the use of new and renewable
energy resources, including the possible use of nuclear energy in the
future, to secure the energy supply that is needed for sustaining its
economic growth.
As a State Party to the NPT, Indonesia has long been a strong advocate
of promoting nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. For its part, Indonesia
has carried out its activities with the IAEA in furthering the application of
nuclear science and technology with a view to address many aspects of
Indonesia's national development programs, particularly in the area of
health, food and agriculture, water resources management, environmental
protection and industry.

Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia remains convinced of the potential benefit of the responsible
use of nuclear technologies and of the synergies fostered by international
cooperation in the nuclear field. In this regard, Indonesia wishes to
reiterate the importance of the role of the IAEA in delivering its statutory
mandate to implement many provisions of the NPT regarding the peaceful
uses of nuclear technology.
Indonesia is of the view that the Technical Cooperation of the IAEA
should be further supported by providing it with adequate resources.
Therefore, we call for all parties to the NPT to work collectively to
implement their commitment to make every effort and to take practical
steps to ensure that IAEA resources for technical cooperation activities
are sufficient, assured and predictable.

2

Since becoming an IAEA member in 1957, Indonesia has been supporting
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, that serves as the main
vehicle to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Indonesia, for
example, provided support to the IAEA technical projects in Myanmar,
Cambodia, and Jordan in the field of agriculture and the utilization of
research reactors, through the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative.

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia believes that we must recognize the nexus between nuclear
security and nuclear safety, and the sustained efforts that are required to
continue to address these two issues in a coherent and synergistic
manner. In addition, it is important to maintain effective emergency
preparedness, response and mitigation capabilities in a manner that
addresses both nuclear security and nuclear safety. There is also a need
to strengthen the link between the international nuclear response system
and the international humanitarian coordination system.
With regard to nuclear safety, it is Indonesia's long standing view that
strengthening the nuclear safety framework worldwide is of great
importance. However, enhancing universal adherence to the nuclear
safety framework, especially to the IAEA nuclear safety standards, is
certainly no less important.
While we are of the view that the primary responsibility for nuclear safety
is in the hands of each State, we also believe that the IAEA's role in
assuring the safety of all nuclear activities worldwide should be enhanced
and strengthened to the extent mandated by its Statutes. We recommend
that this important issue be given due consideration by the Conference.
Indonesia believes that strengthening nuclear safety cannot be a oncetime effort; it should instead be a continuous effort, reinvigorated from
time to time by incorporating new experiences, needs and innovations.
Therefore, any initiative towards continuously strengthening nuclear
safety worldwide is worthy of our support.
3

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia continues to take the necessary measures in securing all
nuclear materials in all facilities in accordance with the existing
international standards under the IAEA regulations by working together
with other nations on a bilateral, regional and global level. In this regard,
Indonesia is working to create a secure and safe atmosphere in nuclear
facilities.
On that note, Indonesia has taken the following steps to fulfill its
commitment on nuclear security:
• First, we have been using and will continue to use Low-enriched
Uranium (LEU) in the production of radioisotope and in the operation
of our nuclear research reactors;
• Second, we have installed Radioactive Portal Monitors (RPM) in some
of our seaports to control nuclear and radioactive materials;
• Third, Indonesia has acceded to the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (ICSANT) through Law No.
10 Year 2014;
• Fourth, the Indonesian Government has started drawing up a draft of
comprehensive law on nuclear security which will be submitted to the
Parliament by 2016;
• Fifth, we have established a center of excellence in nuclear security
and emergency preparedness (I-CoNSEP) which will serve as a
platform to develop and sustain national capabilities in nuclear security
and emergency preparedness;
• Sixth, we have developed a model of "National Legislation
Implementation Kit on Nuclear Security," which was presented to the
2014 Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, to be used as a source
of practical information for other countries to further integrate or
strengthen their national legislation on nuclear security.

4

Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia welcomes the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action between
Iran and P5+1 which was reached on April 2nd 2015 in Lausanne,
Switzerland and hopes that this framework agreement can serve as a
strong basis towards a comprehensive agreement on Iran's nuclear issue.
Indonesia underlines the need for a continued effort to build international
confidence on Iran's nucl~_ar program for peaceful purposes based on
IAEA Statute, the NPT and the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
with a view to finding a durable and peaceful solution.
In this light, Indonesia would like to reaffirm that the inalienable rights of
all parties to NPT for peaceful purposes is the basic rights of every states
parties to NPT and it is thus protected and in accordance with Article IV of
the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that nuclear safety and security
should continue to be framed in the context of promoting nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes. Thus, this Review Conference should
reaffirm the validity of Article IV with a view to ensuring that the rights of
all States Parties are fully protected and that no State Party is limited in
the exercise of its rights to develop research, produce and use nuclear
technologies for peaceful purposes.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

5

