I

PERMANENT MISSION OF REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS, WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

16, Rue de Saint-Jean - 1203 Geneva - Tel. (022) 338 33 50

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Rachmat Budiman
Ambassador/Permanent Representative to the United Nations
and other international organizations in Vienna
on
Cluster 3 Issues:
Implementation of the provisions of the Treaty relating to the
inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes without discrimination

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nnclear Weapons
Geneva, 30 April 2013

Mr. Chairman,

While associating itself with the statement made by the Non-Aligned
Movement States Party to the NPT on Cluster 3, my delegation would like to
make additional comments as follows.
It is beyond doubt that peaceful use of nuclear energy and technology is of
great significance for social and economic development, as well as for climate
change and air pollution mitigation in many parts of the world.

In Indonesia, like in many other countries, nuclear energy and technology
play an important role in addressing many aspects of national development
programs in the areas of health, food and agriculture, water resource
management, environmental protection and industry.
Taking into account of these benefits, which are enjoyed in various areas,
we firmly believe that peaceful uses of nuclear energy must be further promoted
by all States Parties to the NPT. This objective, however, cannot be achieved if
the right of all States Parties to acquire, develop and use nuclear energy and
technology for peaceful purposes as enshrined in Article IV of the NPT, is not
fully protected.
In accordance with Article IV, we all have to ensure that the benefits of
nuclear energy and technology are accessible to all States Parties that resolve to
employ it. They should have access to technology, equipment and materials for
the peaceful use of nuclear energy, without discrimination.
Bearing in mind the social, economic and environmental benefits
mentioned above, we would like to emphasize that the right to develop and use
nuclear technology should in no way be restricted for the purpose of preventing
proliferation.
Mr. Chairman,

We are aware of the fact that the development and use of nuclear
technology might involve a risk of proliferation. However, we do not share the
automatic assumption that the rising interest of many countries in nuclear energy
and technology will necessarily result in higher risk of nuclear proliferation in the
future.
It is worth reminding ourselves that over the last decades, the threat of
proliferation has been sufficiently dealt with by promoting and strengthening the
safeguards system as well as safety and security.
1

We believe that a politicization of peaceful uses of nuclear energy would
not only get in the way of the inalienable right to develop and use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, but would also go against the countries possessing
advanced nuclear technology and those that aspire to a peaceful nuclear
program.
Mr. Chairman

Under the Treaty, IAEA plays a central role in areas of technology transfer
for peaceful purposes. Indonesia supports IAEA technical cooperation
programme that serves as the main vehicle for IAEA to deliver its mandate to
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Through its technical
cooperation programme, the IAEA has helped Member States to build,
strengthen and maintain capacities in the safe, peaceful and secure use of
nuclear technology in support of sustainable economic development.
In our experience, the benefits of the Technical Cooperation program are
tangible. Since becoming a member in 1957, Indonesia has participated actively
and constructively in the work ofthe IAEA. We take part actively in and benefit
widely from the IAEA Technical Cooperation Program. As a result of its decades
of technical cooperation with the IAEA, Indonesia is now ready to share its
achievements and experience in many areas of nuclear technology for
development with other countries.
We are pleased to inform that last year,through the IAEA Peaceful Uses
Initiative (PUI), Indonesia provided support to the IAEA technical cooperation
projects in Myanmar, Cambodia, and Jordan in the field of agriculture and the
utilization of research reactors.
Furthermore, we have also shared our experience and best practices in
various forums and cooperative frameworks, such as the IAEA Scientific Forum
and the Regional Cooperative Agreement. Indonesia also actively participates in
IAEA coordinative research projects involving various institutions and member
states.

It is our belief that many other countries are now also in the position to do
so, thanks to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Program. In light of this, we
believe it is important for all of us to further strengthen the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Program in assisting developing States parties in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, and to redouble our efforts to enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency of its Technical Cooperation program, in accordance with Action 55
and Action 56 of the 2010 NPT Review Conference outcome document.
2

Indonesia is strongly of the view that the IAEA Technical Cooperation
program should be further supported by providing it with adequate resources. We
are concerned over the continued decline in the rate of attainment of IAEA
Technical Cooperation Fund targets over the last few years while the demand for
technical assistance continues to increase as result of more developing countries
joining IAEA since 2008. According to the IAEA DG report, in the 2012, the rate
of attainment was around 88%, compared to 86% in 2011 and 96% in 2008.
Only 95 countries contributed to the Technical Cooperation Fund in 2011, as
compared to 114 countries in 2009.
In this connection, we would like to call for all parties to the NPT, that are
all also members of the IAEA, to work collectively to implement their
commitment, as stipulated in Action 54 of the outcome document, to make every
effort and to take practical steps to ensure that IAEA resources for technical
cooperation activities are sufficient, assured and predictable.
In line with Action 55 of the outcome document, Indonesia supports the
IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) launched in 2010, aimed at raising 100
million dollars by 2015 as extra-budgetary contributions to IAEA activities. In
addition to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund, Indonesia has also contributed
to the PUI to help support the implementation of several IAEA technical
cooperation projects in developing countries.
Mr. Chairman,

Action 57 of the outcome document underlined the need for all States
Parties to the NPT to ensure that, when developing nuclear energy, including
nuclear power, the use of nuclear energy is accompanied by commitments to
appropriate and effective levels of safety and security.
Rest assured, Mr. Chairman, that Indonesia vigorously upholds the
principle of "safety first" in all aspects of nuclear activities. Indeed, our national
safety requirements and standards give no room for complacency. Indonesia,
through its Nuclear Energy Regulatory Agency, continues to pursue policies and
regulations that further stress the importance of ensuring nuclear safety
standards at all levels. In 2012, we successfully established a regulation on
Safety and Security in Nuclear Applications. To further bolster our efforts in the
field of nuclear safety, Indonesia is now preparing for an IAEA Integrated
Regulatory Review Service mission that will take place in 2014, to conduct a full
scale assessment of the country regulatory infrastructure.
At the international level, Indonesia has actively promoted cooperation in
the field of nuclear security. Apart from being an active member of the Asian
3

Nuclear Safety Network aimed at establishing a strong network and forum for
exchange of experience and best practices, Indonesia is actively involved in the
implementation of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, by providing its
experts to support various activities conducted under the Plan.
Mr. Chairman,

The tragic accident at Fukushima in 2011 has reminded all of us that in
exercising our right to develop and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, we
must ensure that nuclear safety is not compromised.
We should be able to prevent nuclear accidents from recurring in the
future. In this regard, nuclear safety must be strengthened worldwide. However,
while we address concerns over nuclear safety and security, we must also avoid
efforts that could impede or complicate the exercising of the right to use and
develop nuclear energy and technology.
To conclude, Mr. Chairman, we would like to call on this Second
Preparatory Committee to reaffirm the validity of Article IV, with a view to
ensuring that the rights of all States Parties are fully protected, and that no State
Party is limited in the exercise of its rights to develop, research, produce and use
nuclear technologies for peaceful purposes.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

4

