Mr. Chairman,
To establish a balance between security concerns and the socio-economic requirements for development, especially for developing countries, Article IV of the Treaty guarantees "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty" and provides for an undertaking by all parties to the Treaty "to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy". This Article also plays a crucial role as the main incentive set forth to encourage non-nuclear-weapon States to join the Treaty and thereby foster the non-proliferation regime.
The inalienable right of all States parties to nuclear technology for peaceful purposes without discrimination indeed constitutes the very foundation of the Treaty. This inalienable right in itself emanates from two broader propositions. First, scientific and technological achievements are the common heritage of humanity. The second general proposition is the requisite balance between rights and obligations, which is the basis of any sound legal instrument. This balance guarantees the longevity of the legal regime by providing incentives for membership and compliance.
Article III, while providing for the undertaking by each non-nuclear-weapon State to conclude safeguards agreements with the IAEA, is equally explicit in articulating that the implementation of such safeguards shall be "in a manner designed to comply with Article IV of this Treaty, and to avoid hampering the economic or technological development of the Parties or international cooperation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities, including the international exchange of nuclear material and equipment for the processing". This notion was duly noted in the final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference when considering that "the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards should not adversely affect the resources available for technical assistance and cooperation. The allocation of resources should take into account all of the Agency's Statutory" functions, including that of encouraging and assisting the development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses with adequate technology transfer."
Given the importance of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and nuclear technologies for human health, agriculture, environmental protection and sustainable economic development, especially in developing countries, the Statute of the IAEA recognizes its role in encouraging and assisting "research on, and development and practical application of, atomic energy for peaceful uses
throughout the world" and fostering "the exchange of scientific and technical information on peaceful uses of atomic energy".
Mr. Chairman,
The recent developments in creating new notions such as "Suspension" of peaceful nuclear activities of State Parties, under the pretext of confidence building , is a dangerous precedence in development of nuclear energy and Science and technology at large. No one can ever find the notion of "Suspension" in the IAEA's Statute, NPT or other relevant international instrument. More worrisome is imposing this new notion on developing countries by applying "Carrot and Stick Policy". Worst is the dirty intention of few industrial countries for "Cessation "but starting with "suspension" of peaceful programs. The instrumental use of UN Security Council in order to impose such policy, calling punitive measures such as "Sanctions" as a new type of "Multilateral Diplomacy" is the most ugliest phenomena of these years creating the worst image of multilateralism. The other serious concern is referring to notion of "Dual Use" nature of some nuclear material or equipment in order to further restrict developing countries. Political motivations aiming at neglecting the technical criteria defined in relevant documents such as the Safeguards agreement and its appendices, and imposing arbitrary list of items of parallel export regimes such as NSG has created serious difficulties and further undermined the NPT and the IAEA. The last but not the least is the attempt of few western countries to create another new notion of "Reading intentions" of State Parties for peaceful or non-peaceful objectives! I recall the responsible reaction of the Director General of the IAEA to this notion to the effect that the Agency has not any verification mechanism to measure the
intention of Member States! This notion is in contravention with Sovereignty of States and undoubtedly creates mistrust among State Parties.
Mr. Chairman,
In fact this new phenomena that is the invention such new notions in the phraseology of nuclear science and technology, which could be extrapolated to other area of science and imposing by force with instrumental use of the United Nations Security Council is the most disturbing development endangering Science being the mankind heritage, the foundations of multilateralism and its vehicles such as the United Nations and the IAEA.
By adopting such decisions, the balance of rights and obligations of the States Parties would be disturbed, the existing discrimination and gap between have and have-nots in the Treaty would be increased, and finally the veiy basis of the fundamental bargain of the NPT would be destroyed.
Furthermore, in recent years, unfortunately the fundamental role of the IAEA in the promotion of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes has been increasingly undermined by shortcomings in resources and restrictions imposed by some States. Since the establishment of the IAEA, developing countries have continuously expressed serious concerns about the funding policy of technical cooperation, based on voluntary contributions that are unpredictable, unsecured and subject to the political motivations of the donors. Safeguards activities are however funded from the regular budget. Such a discriminatory policy with respect to two pillars of the Agency's Statute and the NPT has to be changed. Donors impose their political conditions of technical projects of the IAEA.
Undue restrictions on the transfer of nuclear materials, equipment and technologies for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be swiftly removed. Bilateral and multilateral cooperation among States parties to the Treaty under the supervision of the IAEA on peaceful uses of nuclear energy should never be restricted or confined either by other States or ad hoc export control regimes, such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group. The application of unilaterally enforced export control regimes in contravention of the letter and the spirit of the Treaty has hampered the access of developing countries to nuclear materials, equipment and technologies for peaceful purposes. It is essential to note the fact that, in the Agency's Statute and the NPT, as well as in the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and even the most intrusive instrument, that is the Additional Protocol, there is no provision to prohibit or restrict enrichment and reprocessing activities. The Agency's function is merely to verify the declaration of Member States.
On the contrary, measures need to be taken to ensure that the inalienable rights of all States parties under the provisions of the preamble and articles of the Treaty are all fully protected. No State party should be limited in exercising its rights under the Treaty based on allegations of non-compliance. The inalienable rights of the States parties, as stipulated in the Treaty, cover all aspects of peaceful technologies and are not limited to specific areas. In this connection, the 2000 NPT Review Conference reiterated that "each country's choices and decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected without jeopardizing its policies or international cooperation agreements and arrangements for peaceful uses of nuclear energy and its fuel-cycle policies". Unfortunately, for the first time in the history of the IAEA, the promotional Statutory pillar of the Statute has been put in serious jeopardy through politically motivated decisions of the Security
Council, which is trying to dictate to the Agency what, how and when to deprive a developing Member State of technical cooperation that is solely aimed at humanitarian and peaceful uses. The authority of the IAEA as the sole competent technical international organization for this issue has been seriously undermined.
It should be once again reiterated that arbitrary and self-serving criteria and thresholds regarding proliferation-proof and proliferation- prone technologies can and will only undermine the Treaty. Iran, for its part, is determined to pursue all legal areas of nuclear technology, including fuel cycle and enrichment, exclusively for peaceful purposes. But, no one should be under the illusion that guarantees can theoretically or practically amount to cessation or even suspension of a legal activity that has been and will be carried out under the fullest and most intrusive IAEA supervision.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that, to strengthen the effectiveness and credibility of the Treaty and to put an end to the selective implementation of the articles of the Treaty, the NPT 2010 Review Conference and its preparatory committees should intensify their work in order to prevent further non-compliance of the industrial States parties, with undertakings under Article IV. To ensure the adoption of tangible measures to promote the implementation of the inalienable rights of all States parties, particularly the developing countries, to enjoy their established right under the Treaty to have full access to nuclear materials, technologies, equipment and scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes and, in doing so, preserve the delicate balance between the rights and obligations arising from the Treaty, any new division among the States parties and interpretations incompatible with the wording of the Treaty should be strictly avoided.
According to the Article IV of the Treaty on Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear* energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination.
It also stipulates all the Parties to the Treaty undertake to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Parties to the Treaty in a position to do so shall also cooperate in contributing alone or together with other States or international organizations to the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world.
To this end, the nuclear and industrial states committing numerous breaches of their obligations which can in turn result in infliction of damages on a State Party. Some of the breaches and consequential damages are as follows:
-	Imposing Unnecessary Costs on the Agency,
-	Violation of Article IV of the NPT by hampering peaceful nuclear activities of a State Party,
-	Imposing measures beyond the existing legal commitments of a State Party including suspension of peaceful nuclear activities which can cause lots of human, financial and political damages,
-	Breach of Article XI of the IAEA Statute on facilitating the technical cooperation projects,
-	Involving the Security Council unlawfully,
-	Interruption of technical cooperation of the Agency with a State Party while the raison d'etre of the Agency is to help the Member States in this field,
-	Damage to the authority and credibility of the Agency,
-	Intellectual damages, particularly damage to reputation of a State Party.
Given to the above-mentioned points, this question arises that "who should compensate theses damages and how the compensation should be made?"
Due to the importance of the issue and as no mechanism is designed under the NPT in this regard, the Islamic Republic of Iran proposes that this issue to be inserted on the agenda of the Review NPT Conferences and their Preparatory Committees and a subsidiary body should be established to consider the issue and make recommendations on this subject.
Mr. Chairman,
The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great importance to nuclear safety and security and radiation protection. According to the law passed by the parliament, the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran is fully authorized and responsible for nuclear activities and control of export and import of nuclear material and radioactive materials including radioisotopes for medical, agricultural and industrial application. Iran was an active participant during negotiation on two safety conventions "Early notification and Emergency assistance in case Nuclear Accident" and signed them immediately after conclusion and ratified both conventions.
Permit me to also touch upon nuclear fuel cycle in brief. My delegation expects all participants to take this factual information into consideration that there is no legally binding negotiated instrument for assurances of supply.
Iran is of the view that any proposal on nuclear fuel supply should not impose additional and extra restrictions on peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology, including nuclear fuel cycle of the states parties. They shall be served just as arrangements to facilitate states to exercise their rights to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. My country believes that the IAEA safeguards are the only universally accepted monitoring mechanism to prevent diversion of peaceful nuclear materials and equipments to non peaceful and prohibited applications. Any proposal which include criteria and obligations beyond those of the statutory obligation and Agency's Safeguards agreements are subject to fail and shall be surely rejected by developing countries. Establishing additional nuclear fuel markets are to increase availability and competition further assisting countries to have various options. It by no means shall restrict the sovereign right of Member State to choose and continue their own indigenous option for nuclear fuel for local consumption.
According to the Nuclear Non proliferation Treaty, all member states have inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and clearly this include every state right to have national policies and facilities to plan and produce fuel for its own nuclear reactors including power plants. It is recalled that the final document of the 2000 NPT review conference strongly confirmed and emphasized that, "all states choices and decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy shoidd be respected without jeopardizing their fuel cycle policies. "
Islamic Republic of Iran, while acknowledging that it is premature to discuss and take any decision on these proposals and it needs more time to consider their various political, economical and legal aspects and concerns, is of the view that they will have serious consequences on member states rights under article IV of the NPT. So it is fundamental all proposals with respect to this issue should be consisted with the IAEA statute and the NPT. In addition, in view of the serious consequences of this issue on the rights enshrined in article IV of the NPT, Iran believes that this matter should be subject of thorough analysis and deliberation. Needless to say, any decision in this regard shall require consensus by all Member States of the Agency.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion I would like to emphasize that the implementation of the provisions of Article IV and compliance with the obligations of the nuclear technology owners, including the facilitation of international cooperation should duly be verified and those countries who are responsible for the violation of the Article IV provisions, should compensate the damages inflicted on States parties resulted from their actions.
I thank you.