2015 NPT REVIEW CONFERENCE
THIRD SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
CLUSTER III ISSUES

STATEMENT BY
H.E. AMBASSADOR VINICIO MATI

PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

(NEW YORK, MAY 5th 2014)

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier on
behalf of the European Union. Let me therefore add only a few
remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
Italy fully supports the inalienable right of all NPT Parties to
develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with
the Treaty’s provisions. At the same time, it is worth reiterating
that any peaceful use of nuclear energy should be a responsible
one, as the exercise of any right always implies responsibilities
and obligations. This is even truer in the field of non-proliferation.
Strengthening the global non-proliferation regime and ensuring
fair and responsible access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of
nuclear technologies must go together and complement each other.
To this end, supporting the IAEA’s work is crucial. Italy is a
major contributor to the Agency’s regular budget and actively
supports it through financial contributions to the Nuclear Security
Fund and to the Technical Cooperation Fund.
Mr. Chairman,
Several States and international organizations gathered recently in
The Hague to move a step forward in the strengthening of nuclear
security. At the Third Nuclear Security Summit, Italy submitted a
joint statement on Nuclear Security Training and Support
Centres/Centres of Excellence to reaffirm that education and
training are crucial to the strengthening of capacity building and
security culture. They are crucial to maintaining high-level and
2

well-trained national technical experts and to the exchange of
information and best practices among States.
The Nuclear Security Training and Support Centres Network aims
at strengthening international and regional cooperation to promote
nuclear security education and training. It also encourages the
IAEA and other stakeholders to work with and to support the
further development of nuclear security training, exploring the
synergies between education and training that such centres can
provide for national, regional and global nuclear security.
Recognising the importance of avoiding duplication and overlap,
it also encourages regional cooperation initiatives to facilitate
greater information sharing and the harmonization of respective
capabilities between individual centres in particular areas.
Mr. Chairman,
Increasingly over the past few years, Italy has paid special
attention to education, training and institutional capacity building
as essential elements for an effective safety and security
infrastructure. The International School on Nuclear Security
established in 2010 with the IAEA and the International Centre for
Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste is holding now its fourth
annual training course. The School is highly regarded by the
participants from both developing and emerging countries. The
courses provided professionals involved in the nuclear security
sector with knowledge of the international legal framework on
nuclear security, raising awareness on illicit trafficking in nuclear
and other radioactive material. It enables young professionals, in
particular from developing countries, to acquire relevant
knowledge that is crucial to improve national nuclear security and
contribute to the responsible exercise of the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
3

Mr. Chairman,
Let me finally recall that under the framework of the Global
Threat Reduction Initiative, Italy and the United States have
jointly completed the removal of a significant amount of excess
highly enriched uranium and separated plutonium from Italy. We
plan to continue to work to eliminate additional stock of special
nuclear material.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

4

