(Please check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR.TOSHIOSANO,
AMBASSADOREXTRAORDINARYAND PLENIPOTENTIARY,
DELEGATION OF JAPAN TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT,
GENEVA

THIRD SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

- CLUSTER III NEW YORK, 5 MAY 2014

1

Mr. Chairman,
Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the three pillars of the
NPT, together with the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons and the
pursuit of nuclear disarmament. Under the NPT, all States Parties enjoy the
inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with its Articles I, II
and III.
Japan has highly valued the benefits of nuclear energy and developed its nuclear
industry for over half a century. Alsothe growth in nuclear power use in the world,
particularly in the developing world, is still continuing, due to the high energy
demand worldwide and the need to mitigate the carbon emissions.In such
circumstances, we wish to reiterate the importance of ensuringsafeguards, nuclear
safety and security—so called the “3Ss”—in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, as
well as to promote international cooperation in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
The Abe Administration approved Japan’s new Strategic Energy Plan on the 11th of
April to set out responsible energy policies that take into account a range of the
perspectives, including safety as a major premise, stable energy supply, energy cost
reduction and environmental suitability. This Plan fulfillsJapan’s responsibilities
towards the international community in terms of non-proliferation, nuclear
security and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The efforts towards the restoration and reconstruction of Fukushima should be
placed at the starting point of rebuilding the energy policy. Decommissioning the
TEPCO’s Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station and taking countermeasures for
the contaminated water issue are unprecedented difficult tasks. Therefore, the
Government of Japan does play a more proactive role than before, and undertakes
each measure steadily with an unwavering resolve. Also, the Government has been
reinforcing its supporting function from technical perspectives by bringing
together and utilizing domestic and overseas wisdom in order to steadily proceed
with the preventive and multi-layered measures regarding the decommissioning
and the contaminated water issue. On these issues, the Government recognizes the
importance of providing information to the international community in an accurate
and transparent manner and continues strengtheningsuch efforts with a view to
improvingthe global nuclear safety.
2

The new Strategic Energy Plan priorities the safety assurance before anything else,
and identifies nuclear poweras an important base-load power source which ensures
stable operation at all times with low production cost.
In the long term, dependency on nuclear power generation will be lowered as much
as possible, by savingenergy and introducing renewable energy as well as
improving the efficiency of thermal power generation. However, the targeted
volume of electricity to be secured by nuclear power generation will be
deliberatedby taking Japan’s energy constraints into consideration from the
viewpoint of stable energy supply, cost reduction, global warming and maintaining
nuclear technologies as well as the high-quality human resources.
Japan willfirmly maintain its policy not to possess plutonium reserves without
specified purposes. In order to effectively carry out this policy, Japan does pay due
consideration to the balance between supply and demand of plutonium. Also,
Japan will continue to manage the reserves very carefully.
It is of great importance for Japan to maintain the transparency of the situation of
nuclear material. Japan has been making adequate efforts to ensure the
transparency and these efforts have been widely accepted not only by the IAEA but
also by the international community.Japan will call on the countries concerned to
make efforts to ensure the transparency of the situation of nuclear material.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan highly commends that the initiatives by the IAEA Director General in
promoting nuclear applications have produced tangible outcomes in such areas as
cancer diagnosis and treatment, water management, food security and safety,and
climate change. Japan will remain a strong partner in theseeffortsandcontinue to
support the IAEA’s technical cooperation programsto assist developing countries
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.Japan has consistently paid its financial
share to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF) in full since the foundation of
the fund. Japan urges the other IAEA Member States to do the same.
Japan also supports the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) of the IAEA. Having been fully
recognizing the high utility and benefit of the PUI,Japan has been making a decent
contribution to the PUI every year since 2011including the decision to extend
approximately 2.08 million dollars from fiscal year 2014 budget, and is committed
to makingcontinuous and utmost efforts to support this initiative. We appreciate
the leadership of the United States and also express our gratitude to the IAEA for
3

its efforts inimplementing projects under this initiative. Moreover, we strongly
encourageall parties to contribute to this valuable initiative.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan welcomes the successful outcome of the Nuclear Security Summit held in The
Hague, the Netherlands in March this year, and appeals to all State Parties to
strengthen nuclear security and reduce the continuous threat of nuclear terrorism.
Also, Japan fully supports the IAEA’s nuclear security programmes and new
initiatives, and commends the IAEA for its efforts to strengthen international
cooperation for enhancing nuclear security worldwide.
Japan put forward the prevention of nuclear terrorism as the third pillar of “Three
Preventions”, which is Japan’s new policy concept on non-proliferation. As set out
in
our
working
paper
‘Strengthening
International
Nuclear
Non-Proliferation’submitted to this session of the Preparatory Committee,
strengthening nuclear security is important from the following three perspectives:
(1) Japan’s national security, (2) maintaining public order, and (3) promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. If many countries build and strengthen their
capacity to counter nuclear terrorism, confidence building among nations will be
promoted in the field of international security. Japan will continue to actively
contribute to strengthening global nuclear security and counter-terrorism activities
as one of the countries with the most advanced nuclear technology through various
international fora, including the IAEA.
Japan strengthened its domestic system by establishing the Nuclear Regulation
Authority in September 2012 to address the 3Ss in an integrated manner. Moreover,
Japan is going to receive an International Physical Protection Advisory
Service(IPPAS) mission by spring 2015. We will continue to enhance activities to
foster a nuclear security culture in Japan. As for the Amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, it was submitted to the Japanese
Parliament in February for acceptance.
Japan has been working to minimize sensitive nuclear material to contribute to
strengthening global nuclear security.Also, Japan will further promote research
and development activities andwill reinforce the activities of the Integrated
Support Center for Nuclear Nonproliferation and Nuclear Securityin order to
contribute to the human resource development and capacity building of other
countries. We will further strengthen our collaboration with the IAEA and other
4

organizations while enhancing our networking activities with other countries.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan will continue to work together with the international community to make
every effort to promote and ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a safe
and sustainable manner.
Thank you.//

5

