
Mr. Chairman,
Japan attaches great importance to the inalienable right of all States Parties, as enshrined in Article IV of the NPT, to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT.
Nuclear power generation is an integral part of the peaceful uses foreseen in Article IV of the NPT A growing number of countries worldwide have expressed their interest in embarking on nuclear power programs. In order to support these countries in introducing nuclear power plants, Japan has been actively extending activities, through the IAEA or bilaterally for their capacity building in the fields of safeguards, nuclear safety, and nuclear security (see working paper NPT/CONF.2010/PCII/WP.8 entitled "Peaceful uses of nuclear energy and Japan's experience" in 2008), and continues to strive to increase international understanding on the importance of these aspects widely called "3S".
Mr. Chairman,
Japan welcomes the on-going discussions on the issue of assurance of nuclear fuel supply, and believes it is of importance to establish an effective framework which can be widely accepted, allowing as many countries as possible to participate in it. Japan's proposal on an "IAEA Standby Arrangements System for the Assurance of Nuclear Fuel Supply" covers not only uranium enrichment but also all important activities of the front-end of the nuclear fuel cycle. The proposal is compatible with other proposals and will contribute to enhancing transparency and predictability of the front-end market. In addition, Japan is making active contributions to the international debate about the assurance of nuclear fuel supply, for example by hosting "Seminar on Global Nuclear Fuel Supply " on 26 January 2009 at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) headquarters in Vienna, Austria in order to contribute to promote informed discussions on issues relating to the front-end of the nuclear fuel cycle as a whole.
Nuclear security constitutes an important building block that demands serious attention in order to ensure the peaceful use of nuclear energy. To prevent nuclear terrorism, it is essential to enhance not only the management of nuclear power plants and related nuclear fuel cycle facilities, but also the control of all nuclear and radioactive material. Japan welcomes the US President's proposal to make new international efforts to strengthen the control of nuclear material
and to host a "Global Summit on Nuclear Security." Japan will cooperate with the United States in efforts to bring this global summit to a successful conclusion. With respect to nuclear safety, Japan has long attached great importance to nuclear safety, striving to address particular safety issues and enhance the safety culture in general. Following Japan's recent experiences of the strong Niigataken Chuetsu-oki earthquake in July 2007, and the subsequent effects it had on the Kashiwasaki-Kariwa plant, Japan has been paying special attention to core matters including transparency and the sharing of lessons learned with other Member States. Bearing this in mind, Japan will maintain its efforts to contribute to the improvement of international nuclear safety.
The transport of radioactive materials is an essential element when it comes to obtaining maximum benefits from peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this connection, ensuring the safe and secure transport of radioactive materials is important for all countries. Japan has been making every effort to enhance understanding among coastal States on maritime transport, and is pleased that discussions on communication between shipping States and coastal States have made significant progress recently.
Japan believes that International technical cooperation in the area of the peaceful use of nuclear technology plays a key role in achieving the goals outlined in the NPT. In this regard Japan will submit a working paper regarding Japan's activities in technical cooperation related to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy at this Third Session of the Preparatory Committee. The working paper details Japanese contributions in the areas of nuclear safety, security and safeguards, in addition to nuclear science, technology and applications in fields including human health and agriculture. Japan attaches great importance to these aspects and has a long record of international cooperation, as demonstrated in the paper.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan will continue to collaborate with the international community to make every effort to ensure the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Thank you