
Mr. Chairman,
Let me begin by congratulating you upon your election to the chairmanship of Main Committee III. We trust that your experience and skillful guidance will bring a fruitful outcome of this Committee. My delegation will spare no effort in co-operating with you in the discharge of your important duties.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is founded on three main pillars, namely, prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. To slight any one of these three pillars would seriously jeopardize the credibility of the entire non-proliferation regime. The NPT regime, as a whole, serves as an international framework to facilitate cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy among industrialized and developing countries.
Japan is determined, as one of the countries that have most extensive activities in peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to do its best to extend such cooperation bilaterally and multilaterally, and promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while, at the same time, ensuring non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this respect, I would like to underline that Japan greatly appreciates and supports the particularly important role played by IAEA in pursuing the objectives of both non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
In our view, the development and utilization of nuclear energy plays, and will continue to play, an important role in economic and social development. Many countries have benefitted greatly from the utilization of nuclear energy, such as power generation and its applications in the fields of agriculture, health and industrial application.
It is our firm belief that nuclear power is, and should continue to be, one of the major sources of energy, in addition to fossil fuels and hydroelectric power. In particular, nuclear power contributes considerably to our efforts to cope with global warming by minimizing the emission of carbon dioxide.
By way of illustration, if Japan were to replace its 52 nuclear power stations tomorrow, by even a conservative estimate it has to import 1.5 millions more barrels of oil per day. If the world has to replace all its nuclear power stations which today generate 358 gigawatts of electricity or roughly 17% of the world electricity (in 1998), the world has to increase its oil production by 16 million barrels per day. You may be aware that the oil price has more than doubled in recent months and remember the recent hassle the OPEC Oil Ministers had over the increase of their oil production. They agreed to increase the production by 1.5 million barrels per day. This is just 9 percent of the additional oil the world would need if it were to replace all the nuclear power reactors.
This would not be the only cost to the world. This would add 2 billion more tons of C02s to the earth's atmosphere every year. It would require more tankers, more pipelines, berths and storage facilities to be built around the world. The tankers would have to navigate through Suez, Malacca and Panama.
Mr. Chairman,
It goes without saying that the development and utilization of nuclear energy must proceed hand in hand with assurances of non-proliferation and safety. Without sufficient safeguards against proliferation, spread of peaceful use may end up in spread of nuclear weapons. The need for nuclear safety cannot be over-emphasized. While the primary responsibility for nuclear safety lies in the hands of each individual country, international cooperation can also play an essential role in keeping up the safety standards in this area and promoting a safety culture.
Japan, among other things, has been extending various support projects to help the countries of the former Soviet Union and East and Central Europe improve the safety of their nuclear facilities. We also extend support through funds established in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, such as NSA or CSF, and also through special contributions to support programmes under the auspices of OECD/NEA.
Mr. Chairman.
We regard the entry-into-force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety in 1996 was an important milestone in promoting cooperation in this important field. Japan, as a party to this Convention, participated in the first review meeting of this Convention held in April 1999. The Japanese participants to this meeting noted with satisfaction the successful result of the meeting. Our delegation hopes that more countries will accede to this Convention, so that more countries can benefit from such review process.
Last September, the criticality accident occurred in Tokai-mura. The Japanese Government conducted a thorough investigation into the causes of the accident and came up with a recommendation on measures to prevent similar accidents. We believe that it is very important to share the information and lessons learned from the accident with the international community in order to prevent recurrence of similar incidents.
We also believe that it has become important for us to address the issues related to the Radioactive Waste management, as we continue to produce more of such wastes as a result of our uses of nuclear energy. The safe and environmentally sound disposal of high-level radioactive wastes in particular remains a challenge for us. We are determined to continue our pursuit of a widely acceptable solution to this problem.
Japan shares grave concerns about the illicit trafficking of nuclear materials, and considers that there is a need for strengthened international cooperation in the area of physical protection. In this area, too, Japan has extended assistance to countries like Kazakstan, Belarus and Ukraine to help strengthen their State Systems of Accounting for and Control of Nuclear Material. Japan also appreciate the efforts of IAEA and other countries to strengthen physical protection. Japan intends to continue to contribute to the activities and discussions now undertaken in the IAEA for improvement of physical protection.
Mr. Chairman,
One of the basic policy of the Japanese government is the establishment of a nuclear fuel cycle whereby plutonium and other materials recovered by processing of spent fuel are reused to secure a steady long-term source of energy, and radioactive waste is processed and disposed of properly. The development and use of atomic energy in Japan will be strictly limited to peaceful use. In particular, the use of plutonium will continue to be based on the principle of having no more plutonium than necessary for a rational and logical plan for peaceful use. We will continue to further improve transparency in our use of plutonium through annual publication of the management status of plutonium and reporting of the amount of plutonium stocks in accordance with International Guidelines for the Management of Plutonium.
Japan is in the process of formulating a new Long-Term Program for Research, Development and Utilization of Nuclear Energy for the 21st century based on such ideas.
Mr. Chairman,
Paragraph 2 of Article IV of the Treaty provides for international cooperation and, in particular, calls for "due consideration for the needs of the developing area of the world" in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In this regard, Japan takes note with satisfaction of the successful achievements so far attained through the IAEA's Technical Co-operation Programmes. We welcome in particular the efforts to strengthen and increase the effectiveness of these co-operation programmes through the implementation of Technical Co-operation Strategy, which was approved by the Board of Governors in December 1997. Japan has been actively supporting these programmer. For example, among the numerous contributions of Japan through IAEA Technical Cooperation, we are proud of the successful implementation of the programmes concerning desulfurization of fuel gas emissions in Poland and Bulgaria with radio isotope technology. Japan is also a major contributor to the Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF) and is proud of its record of full payment since its establishment.
Japan has also fully supported and played a central role in technical cooperation with developing countries in Asia and Pacific through the implementation of the "Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology" (RCA).
In the area of bilateral cooperation with developing countries, Japan has carried out a variety of programmes in such forms as exchange of technical experts and of information, in such diversified areas as Industrial Applications, Environment, Human Health, and Radiation Protection. Japan will continue its efforts to pursue effective technical cooperation activities, taking into account the financial situation, technical capability and needs of recipient countries.
Some delegations have, nevertheless, expressed their concerns about the level of the Technical Co-operation Fund (TCF). Although such concerns are to be addressed seriously in the IAEA's deliberations, in view of the scarcity of available resources, we feel that more care should be taken to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of each project to be undertaken.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
  

