STATEMEJYTBY HE AMB. UKUR K YATANI
LEADER OFDELEGATIONOFKENYA
AT THE FIRST SESSION OF

THEPREPARATORYCOMMlTIEE FOR THE 2015 REVlEW CONFFRENCE
-CLU~3ISSUESONPEACEFULUSESOFNU~ENERCY

WEDNESDAY,9m MAY ZOl2

Mr. Chairman,
1. Kenya is taking the floor for the first time and we would like to
begin by congratulating you not only for your election to preside
over the First Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review
Conference but also for the high level of professionalism you have
shown during the past few days. We assure you and your Bureau
of our fullest support.
We associate ourselves fully with the statement of the Non-aligned
Movement Parties to the NPT delivered by the distinguished
representative of E m t .

Mr. Chairman,
Before addressing the issues under this cluster, allow me to
briefly mention that in our view, the NPT remains the only
instrument for achieving international peace and security based on
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, the final document
agreed in 2000 and the Action plan agreed upon at the 2010 Review
Conference. Kenya is convinced that it is only through total
elimination of nuclear weapons that we can guarantee against the
use or threat of nuclear weapons.
2.

We emphasize therefore that the 2015 Review Conference must
place equal emphasis on the three pillars of the NPT regime,
namely, nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses
of energy. Of these three, the most important is nuclear
disarmament. In our considered opinion, the moral, legal and
military arguments are compelling and therefore urge for conclusion
of legally binding security assurances against the use of nuclear
weapons. We also look forward to a n early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
3. Kenya is convinced that all existing nuclear disputes can be
resolved through diplomacy and within the multilateral framework,
We therefore call on both sides of the divide to engage in a sincere
dialogue in order to arrive at a meaningful arrangement.

4. With regard to peaceful uses of energy, we reiterate the position

stated by the African Union leaders when they adopted the Plan of
Action on Peaceful Uses of Energy. The leaders underscored the
inalienable right of African States to the free access to nuclear
energy and technology for peaceful purposes and sustainable
development. This right is stipulated under Article IV of the NPT.
Kenya welcomes the entry into force in July 2009 of the African
Nuclear-Weapon Free Zone Treaty namely the Treaty of Pelindaba.
The treaty provides a framework for African member states who
may opt to develop nuclear energy for their sustainable
development to do so in a responsible manner.
5 . In view of the fore-mentioned, Kenya urges the international
community to safeguard this right and to facilitate meaningful
cooperation to enable all states parties, in conformity with their
international obligations to develop, research, produce and use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

Mr. Chairman,
6 . Kenya commends the IAEA for the role it continues to play
under its technical cooperation programme in promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Under the programme, the Agency
provides a platform not only for sharing of knowledge and expertise
to promote, inter alia, sustainable development but also in building
capacity for a critical mass in developing countries in the field of
nucleat science. For African member states Kenya included, the
programme focuses on human health, water resources
management, agricultural development, and environmental
management.

7. With regard to sustainable energy development, Kenya is among
a n increasing number of developing member states investing in the
development of Nuclear power.
We therefore welcome the
assurance given by the representative of the IAEA in his statement
delivered during the first day of this Prepcom to the effect that
member states who opt to add nuclear power to their energy mix
can count on the assistance of the Agency at every stage.

8. However, for the IAEA to effectively continue promoting the
peaceful uses of the atoms of peace and to provide assistance to
Member States to develop appropriate regulatory infrastructure
framework, meaningful steps need to be taken towards enhancing
the resources of the Technical Cooperation Fund. This would
include actions that are aimed a t increasing the Fund in a manner
that matches the overall increase in the Agency's regular budget.

9. Kenya expresses appreciation to the Member States that
continue to support the IAEA projects and welcomes the
announcement by the United States that it is stepping u p support
to the Peaceful Uses Initiative. Kenya would like to encourage other
Member States in a position to do so to provide additional funds to
the initiative.

10. In conclusion Mr. Chairman, permit me to reiterate the
importance of universality of the NPT and to appeal to those
countries that have not yet done so to join the Treaty. At the same
time, we hope that the 2015 Review Conference will among other
issues of the NPT regime address itself to the issue of withdrawal
from the Treaty. Attempts by States to conclude bilateral
agreements on nuclear energy outside the framework of the N P T
must be discouraged a s they can only undermine the integrity of
the Treaty.

I thank you.

