Lebanon would like to congratulate you, Ambassador Nakano, on your assumption of the chairmanship of Main Committee III. Fully confident in your ability to conduct the meeting to a productive outcome, Lebanon would also like to assure you of its fullest support.
Lebanon subscribes to the statement delivered by HE the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) as well as to the one delivered by Lebanon on behalf of the Arab Group.
Mr. Chairman, it has already been stated several times - but there is no harm in repeating it - that part of the magic formula holding the NPT together and giving it consistency and meaning is the inalienable right guaranteed to non- nuclear weapon States, to benefit fully of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in exchange of giving up their nuclear weapons option. This right is enshrined in Article 4 of the treaty,
From the outset, Lebanon has been committed to the NPT and to Article 4. It has ever since placed its so far modest nuclear activity under the IAEA safeguards and verification regime. Lebanon is an active member of the IAEA and relies on its technical cooperation program in areas like health, agriculture, water resources, research, etc. Nuclear science and applications are developing at a fast pace worldwide and nothing prevents Lebanon in the future from considering a possible expansion of its peaceful nuclear program, in a manner consistent with its needs, capabilities, and energy policy.
Lebanon has always been adamant on improving to the utmost its safety and security record with regard to the activities carried out under the umbrella of its technical cooperation with the IAEA. Therefore it has ratified almost all related international instruments and is totally transparent in the discharging of its obligations. The only convention whose ratification process is still underway, although it has been signed, is the "Joint convention on the safety of spent fuel management and on the safety of radioactive waste management".
All indicators are ushering towards a heavier reliance on nuclear energy and nuclear power in the years to come, warranting a greater emphasis on the inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear technology especially for developing countries.
It is apparent from our deliberations so far, that the international community is keen on upholding this right. The risk of this right being undermined has nevertheless not totally evaporated. We have to caution against possible trends, initiatives or developments that could, if misguided, miscalculated or unilaterally driven undermine it. This could amount to dealing a severe blow to the NPT as a whole.
In this context we would like to make the following remarks:
We have to avoid anything that could upset the balance between the three pillars of the NPT.
We have to steer away from any initiative or set of measures that would change the order of the priorities of the IAEA as enshrined in its statute and lead to dwarfing the technical cooperation activities in favor of other activities. In this regard, Lebanon echoes the call of many other delegations to a renewed commitment to a sufficient, assured and predictable financing of technical cooperation in the IAEA.
We recognize that to each right are attached some duties, and the right to peaceful use is no exception. However we should be careful not to blur the frontiers between what is legally binding on state parties, what is voluntarily agreed to by them, and what could seem desirable as confidence-building measures.
A
Non-proliferation concerns are of the utmost importance, but they should not translate in a way which could unduly or unjustifiably restrict the export of nuclear material or nuclear technology to developing countries.
The issue of assurances of nuclear fuel supply or more broadly, the multilateralization of fuel cycle is one that merits our attention. But Lebanon considers that in the absence of a thorough analysis and consensus on all the ramifications and the complexities thereof, half measures or hasty initiatives may create more problems than they solve.
This said we hope that these elements could as appropriate be reflected in the outcome of our deliberations.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



