Thank you Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement of NAM States Parties to the NPT under this cluster. In addition, my delegation wishes to briefly make the following comments focusing on the peaceful use of nuclear energy:
2.	Malaysia wishes to reiterate the great importance it attaches to the Agency's technical cooperation activities since these activities are the main statutory vehicles for transferring nuclear technology to developing countries for their socio-economic development. In view of the key role of the Technical Cooperation Programme in the delivery of peaceful use of nuclear energy to Member States, it is essential that resources allocated to it are sufficient, assured and predictable.
3.	Malaysia stresses that the implementation of Technical Cooperation activities should be in accordance with the requests and needs of Member States. In this regard Malaysia emphasizes that all measures taken and policies adopted in the implementation of such projects, particularly in developing countries, should further preserve and enhance self-ownership.
4.	My delegation wishes to highlight that the formulation of the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme, is consistent with its Statute and the guiding principles as contained in Document INFCIRC/267. The Programme also takes into account all the decisions of the IAEA's policy-making organs and the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council. Malaysia therefore believes that no additional criteria should be imposed for the screening of Member States' projects.
5.	Malaysia would like to further emphasize that any political, economic, military or other conditions subjected to the technical cooperation and assistance provided by the IAEA to Member States would be inconsistent of Article 3c of its Statute.
6.	Malaysia categorically rejects the notion of "non-proliferation of sensitive technologies". The Treaty is not discriminatory in providing access to peaceful nuclear technology. The underlying principle and objective of the Treaty is that "all Parties are entitled to participate in the fullest possible exchange of scientific information for, and to contribute alone or in cooperation with other States to, the further development of the applications of atomic energy for peaceful purposes".
7.	With regard the issue of multilateral nuclear fuel assurance, Malaysia reiterates its position that any initiative to develop multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should
l
focus on the original aim of finding an optimum arrangement that would satisfy both the objectives of assurance of supply and services. The existing international regime based on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), of which Malaysia is a State Party, and the IAEA NPT-type safeguards system should provide the necessary non-proliferation assurances.
8.	Malaysia believes that any attempt to capitalize on the initiative to develop these multilateral approaches as an avenue to introduce either any new or additional non-proliferation commitments, including that of denial of technology acquisition, beyond those enshrined under existing non-proliferation regime and obligations would most likely lead to the same negative outcome as numerous past efforts to enhance supply assurances.
9.	Malaysia also firmly believes that priority in the transfer of peaceful nuclear technology should be given to developing countries parties to the Treaty that have consistently been honoring their respective non-proliferation commitments according to Articles I and II of the Treaty.
10.	Malaysia views multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the proposed nuclear fuel bank under the aegis of the IAEA, as being multidimensional concepts that still require extensive study with respect to their technical, economic, legal and political implications. A conservative and cautious approach should, therefore, be taken on this matter, until all relevant concerns have been fully addressed.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
2