Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
CLUSTER 3: PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY
OF THE FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020
REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
VIENNA, 9 MAY 2017

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf
of the NAM States Parties to the NPT. Malaysia attaches great importance to the
inalienable right of all States Parties to develop, research, produce and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination, as enshrined in Article IV of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
2.
The Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference reaffirmed the
principle to observe the legitimate right of all States Parties, in particular developing
States, to full access to nuclear material, equipment and technological information
for peaceful purposes. Therefore, Malaysia reaffirms that the principle of nondiscrimination and the inalienable right of state parties to decide and choose the
fields of peaceful uses of nuclear energy including their fuel policies should be fully
observed and respected.
Mr. Chairman,
3.
The IAEA, in accordance with Articles II and III of its Statute, plays a central
role in promoting global peace, health and prosperity through peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. The increasing number of IAEA activities in the various areas such
as but not limited to nuclear sciences, technology, nuclear energy and human health
applications pave an important way for meeting Member States’ developmental
challenges in achieving the 2030 UN Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thus,
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is an important vehicle towards
achieving the objectives of Article IV of the NPT Treaty.
4.
Malaysia fully recognises the important role of the IAEA through the Technical
Cooperation Programme in supporting the safe, secure and peaceful application of
nuclear science and technology for sustainable socio-economic development.
Malaysia also fully recognises the IAEA as the main vehicle for transfer of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes through partnership with Member States and
relevant stakeholders.

5.
As both recipient and contributor to the Technical Cooperation Program,
Malaysia had the opportunity to strengthen and maintain institutional capacities for
the safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear technology to support its national
development priorities in the areas of agriculture and food security, human health
and nutrition, environmental resource management, energy planning, industrial
development, safety and security.
Mr. Chairman,
6.
Given the central role of the IAEA as the main vehicle for transfer of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes, we would like to reiterate the importance for the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme to be formulated and implemented strictly
in accordance with the provisions of the IAEA Statute and the guiding principles and
policies as contained in INFCIR/267 as well as the relevant decisions of the IAEA
policy making organs.
7.
Malaysia fully supports the need to increase the resources and to provide a
sufficient, assured and predictable funding for the implementation of various
activities related to peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At the same time, Malaysia
underscores the need for all Member States to honour their due financial obligations
to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund in order to meet the objectives of Article IV
of the NPT Treaty and the objectives as mandated in Articles II and III of the IAEA
Statute. We strongly believe that it is vital to attain a sound and sustainable funding
to enable the IAEA to implement its mandated activities effectively for the full
benefits of Member States.
8.
Finally, Malaysia wishes to reiterate the need to respect the inalienable right
of Member States, as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT, to develop, research,
production and use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, without any
discrimination, in conformity with its international legal obligations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

