Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement of NAM States Parties to the NPT on this cluster of issues. My delegation also wishes to highlight some elements that we view as important for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
2.	In view of the increasing global interest, particularly among the developing NPT States Parties, in nuclear energy as a means of assuring their long-term national energy supply security and, consequently, sustainable socio-economic development, Malaysia firmly believes in the need to reaffirm the inalienable right enshrined under Article IV of the NPT for all the Parties to the Treaty to develop, research, produce and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the Treaty. This right is especially important in view of the significant contribution of nuclear electricity generation both in the mitigation of adverse global climate change and in the context of sustainable development.
3.	In this regard, Malaysia underscores the need for the IAEA to maintain an appropriate balance between the three pillars of its mandate, namely the promotion of nuclear technology transfer for peaceful uses, promotion of the safety of nuclear energy and technology applications, and verification of nuclear weapon non-proliferation compliance, in a fair and professional manner, consistent with the spirit and letter of the NPT. Malaysia, on its part, will continue to support the IAEA, towards realising the full potential of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology for the benefit of humankind.
4.	My delegation also wishes to recall that Principle 19 of the Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament agreed to at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference embodies a commitment by States Parties to make every effort to ensure that the IAEA has the financial and human resources necessary to meet effectively its responsibilities in the areas of technical cooperation, safeguards and nuclear safety.
5.	Pursuant to this, Malaysia has consistently been fulfilling its financial obligations to the IAEA in full and in a timely manner. Malaysia has also been contributing to the IAEA Extra Budgetary Fund, to help realise the rights of NPT
States Parties to benefit from peaceful utilisation of nuclear energy, on top of its assessed contribution to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund. In addition, Malaysia has hosted numerous Regional Training Courses, and received IAEA Fellows from other States Parties, besides providing its experts to other States, either under the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme or the Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research, Development and Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology in Asia and the Pacific (RCA), administered through the IAEA. Further, Malaysia recognises the contributions of other States, in particular the major donor States, which have contributed extra-budgetary resources on top of their assessed contribution to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund.
Mr. Chairman,
6.	Malaysia welcomes the initiative of the IAEA in developing multilateral approaches to the front and back end of the nuclear fuel cycle, as a means of addressing the current proliferation and security challenges arising from proliferation-sensitive operations within the nuclear fuel cycle. However, Malaysia is of the view that any such multilateral approach to the nuclear fuel cycle should not adversely affect the fundamental inalienable rights of the NPT States Parties to develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes, either by imposing a mandatory permanent suspension of any part of such rights as a pre-condition for participation by any NPT State Party in any such multilateral approach, or otherwise.
7.	Malaysia is of the firm view that any initiative to develop multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should focus on the original aim of finding an optimum arrangement that would satisfy both the objectives of assurance of supply and services, as well as non-proliferation assurance. In terms of non-proliferation assurances, Malaysia notes that there exists an international regime based on the NPT and the IAEA NPT-type comprehensive safeguards system.
8.	As such, for Malaysia, the focus in developing multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should be on developing innovative approaches to enhance supply assurances, consistent with the existing non-proliferation safeguards regime. Any attempt to capitalise on the initiative to develop these multilateral approaches as an avenue to introduce either any new or additional non-proliferation commitments, including that of denial of technology acquisition, beyond those enshrined under existing non-proliferation regimes and obligations would most likely lead to the same negative outcome as numerous past efforts to enhance supply assurances.
9.	As recommended in the final report of the Expert Group on Multilateral Approaches to the Nuclear Fuel Cycle that was established by the IAEA Director General in 2004, Malaysia shares the view that the value of "assurance of supply" in any multilateral arrangement should be measured by associated incentives, such as guarantees provided by suppliers, governments and international organisations, economic benefits that would be gained by countries participating in multilateral arrangements, and better political and public acceptance for nuclear power projects. One of the most critical steps is to devise effective and incentive-based mechanisms for assurances of supply of material and services, which are commercially competitive, free of monopolies and free of inappropriate political constraints.
Mr. Chairman,
10.	Fundamentally Malaysia believes that the inalienable right of all parties to the NPT to develop, research, produce and utilize nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Article IV of the Treaty, which is one of the pillars of the NPT, must be preserved and respected. Malaysia accepts that it is the prerogative of any State Party to the NPT to decide whether to exercise or temporarily suspend those rights in accordance with their national position and/or interests. Nevertheless, Malaysia rejects any attempt to impose the suspension of those rights as a precondition for assurances of supply of nuclear fuel and/or nuclear fuel cycle services.
11.	Malaysia also firmly believes that the nuclear non-proliferation export control regimes established independently from the framework of the NPT should be de-politicised and rationalised with the fundamental provisions of the NPT, if multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle are to succeed. In this context, any denial of export should solely be based on a breach of non-proliferation commitments by the importing State Party as exclusively verified by the IAEA, as the safeguards verification agency for the NPT.
12.	With regards to the transfer of peaceful nuclear technology, Malaysia believes that priority should be given to the developing countries of the States Parties to the NPT that have consistently been honouring their respective non-proliferation commitments according to Articles I and II of the Treaty, in order to gain the confidence of the developing countries in the context of the multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle.
Thank you. Mr. Chairman.