·.,
M
.

· - ...--.· : ..

-t.:..~

'

• . ,,(,C.._,,.

--

. ~;.s_~gJ?: .... -

STATEMENT BY MS. RASYIDAH ZAINAL
REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
CLUSTER 3: PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY
OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2020 REVIIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR W EAPO NS
GENEVA, 1 MAY 2018

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itseif with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf
of the NAM States Parties to the NPT. Malaysia attaches great importance to the
inalienable right of all States Parties to develop research, produce and use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination, as enshrined in Article IV of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) .
Mr. Chairman,
2.
Malaysia fully recognises the important role played by the IAEA in supporting
safe , secure and peaceful applications of science and technology for sustainable
socio-economic development. The IAEA is the main vehicle for transfer of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes.
3.
We commend the conferences organised by the IAEA, Member States and
relevant stakeholders in 2017 namely the International Conference on the IAEA
Technical Cooperation Programme and the International Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Power in the 21s t Century in Abu Dhabi. These conferences were useful
platforms to promote the contributions and benefits of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and technology . in line with the IAEA's theme, "Atoms for Peace and
Development" , these · conferences fully attest Member States ' commitments to
comply with Articles I, II, Ill and IV of the NPT. Therefore , Malaysia looks forward to
participate constructively at the 2018 Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Science and
Technology.
Mr. Chairman,
4.
Malaysia firmiy believes that research and development plays a critical role in
realising the long-tarm goals of peaceful application of nuclear science and
technology for the collective benefits of Member States and the IAEA. Malaysia
enjoyed immense benefits fr9m the research and development (R&D) in various

fields such as agriculture , manufacturing and industry , medicine and healthcare ,
environment, and climate change mitigation. These R&D efforts have had and
continue to have significant contributions to the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) . Therefore, Malaysia encourages all countries with the
capacity to do so , to support the Agency's efforts to moderr;iise the nuclear
applications laborato ries under the Renovation of the Nuclear Applications
Laboratories (ReNuAL ) prnject.
5.
As a member of NPT, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to achieve a world
free of nuclear weapons. Malaysia is strongly committed to achieve the highest
standards of nuclea r safety , nuclear security and nuclear safeguards . Malaysia
continues to suppor t the implementation of various activities related to peaceful
applicat ions of nuclear science and technology through the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Pro gra mme , ':he Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) and the Regional
Cooperative Agree ment. These activities , among others include:
5.1
5.2
5.3

Developing a long-term sustainable Borehole Disposal Facility for the
IVlanagement of Disused Sealed Radioactive Sources;
Orga nising the 14th Post-Graduate Educational Course (PGEC) on
Rad iation Prote ction and Safety of Radioactive Material ; and
W elcoming the !AEA advisory services such as the Integrated Safety
Assess ment of Research Reactors (INSARR mission), International
Nucl ear Secur ity Advisory Service (I NSServ) and hosting of the
International Physical Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS);

6.
As a region al I\!ucle ar Security Support Centre (NSSC) , Malaysia is
committed to stre ngthen global nuclear security. In March 2018, Malaysia in
collaborat ion w ith li\JT ERPO L's Radiological Nuclear Terrorism Prevention Unit
(RNTPU) conduc ted an Operation Conduit to improve the capabilities of law
enforcement age ncies in combating illicit trafficking of nuclear and other radioactive
mater ials.
7.
Malaysi 2 fu lly endorses the Global Initiatives to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
(GICNT) Stateme nt of Principles . In line with this Statement of Principles, Malaysia
and Thailand had successf ully implemented the Joint Table-Top Cross Border
Nuclear Security Exercise. Malaysia looks forward to hosting a Trilateral Exercise
jointly with Indo nesia ancl the Philippines on Detection and Response to Nuclear
Security, with the foc us on maritime issues in August 2018 .
Mr. Chairman ,
8.
Malays ia 'fuiiy supports the need to provide sufficient , assured and predictable
funding for the impiernem2tion of various activities related to peaceful uses of
nuclear energy . !n meming the objective of Article IV of the NPT and the objectives
mandated in A rticles !! and Iii of the IAEA Statute, we see the merits to have an
2

appropriate increase
Cooperation Fund .

in both the

IAEA

Regular

Budget

and the Technical

9.
Finally , Malaysia would like to reiterate that the fundamental goal of the NPT
hinges on the degree of com mitments made in all three pillars by NPT States
Parties . Therefore, the Treaty , as well as the steps and actions agreed upon by
Review Conferences m ust be implemented equally in all its aspect without favour or
prejudice .
Thank you .

3

