Thank you Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement of the NAM States Parties to the NPT. In addition, my delegation washes to make the following points.
Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA's technical cooperation activities are of great importance to Malaysia. It enables transfer of nuclear technology to States like Malaysia that pursue peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The promotion of peaceful applications of nuclear energy constitutes a fundamental activity of the IAEA, as emphasized in INFCIRC/267. The IAEA must be equipped with sufficient, assured and predictable resources to enable States pursuing peaceful uses of nuclear energy to benefit from the transfer of nuclear technology.
Technical cooperation programmes should continue to be developed in a professional, impartial and non-discriminatory manner, in line with the IAEA Statute and implemented based on a Member States' needs. The IAEA must maintain the highest level of professionalism in developing and implementing these programmes. Malaysia strongly believes that the present guidelines and criteria as provided for in INFCIRC/267 for the screening of project proposals, programme implementation and subsequent evaluation, are sufficient and effective.
The NPT entitles Member States of the Treaty to have access to nuclear technology in a non-discriminatory manner. The Treaty also provides for exchange of nuclear knowledge and scientific information as well as foster cooperation amongst States to develop the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Nuclear knowledge and technology is vital for socio-economic development and must be further enhanced and sustained, particularly in their contribution to energy, food, water security and healthcare as well as environmental preservation. In this regard, Malaysia is pleased to co-sponsor Japan's Working Paper entitled Strengthening the Technical Cooperation Activities of the IAEA.Malaysia is ready to engage Member States to fully address all aspects of the issue of assurances of nuclear fuel supply. We call for the establishment of an open-ended working group to discuss this matter in detail. Nuclear fuel and fuel sendees must be made available in accordance with the provisions of the Statute, to all Member States who are in full compliance with their non-proliferation commitments under the IAEA's safeguards mechanisms, and with the exclusive verification of compliance by the IAEA, A decision on supply assurances of nuclear fuel must be adopted by consensus in the General Conference.
6. Malaysia is concerned over the denials of transfer of nuclear technology, material and equipment, especially to developing countries, as it adversely affects advancement in medical technology' and healthcare applications. Malaysia welcomes the efforts of the International Steering Committee on Denials of Shipment of Radioactive Material in addressing this growing concern.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.









2

2

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



