
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, 
At the outset, allow me, on behalf of the Malaysian Delegation, to join other Delegations in congratulating you on your election to the Chair of this important Committee. Allow me to also congratulate the Vice-Chairmen of this Committee for their appointments. I firmly believe that your wisdom and experience will guide us through the ensuing negotiations and would wish to assure you that my Delegation will do our best to assist you to bring your task to a successful conclusion. 
2. For the record, my Delegation wishes to associate itself with the Working Paper presented by the Members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries Parties to NPT, as contained in document NPT/CONF.2000/18 and, in particular, with those pertinent paragraphs relating to Articles III, IV, V and IX of the Treaty. My Delegation does not intend to repeat the points that have been raised on the matter before us, but would, however, wish to outline the elements that should be highlighted in the report of this Committee. 
Mr. Chairman, 
3. Principle 19 of the Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference has embodied the commitment by States Parties to the Treaty to make every effort to ensure that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has the financial and human resources necessary to meet effectively its responsibilities in the areas of technical co-operation, safeguards and nuclear safety. My Delegation strongly believes that, implicit in this Principle, is the need for equitable emphasis on the three pillars of technical co-operation, safeguards and nuclear safety in the conduct of IAEA activities. 
4. Substantial progress has been achieved since the 1995 Review and Extension Conference in the area of safeguards through the adoption of the Additional Protocol. Substantial progress has also been achieved in the area of nuclear safety over the same period through the adoption of the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, the related Convention for Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. Regrettably, the equally important issue of funding of the Agency's technical co-operation programme through predictable and assured resources continues to remain unresolved. 
5. Notwithstanding the fact that the method by which technical co-operation ought to be offered is not explicitly spelled out in the Treaty, it is generally recognised that the resources provided to and received from States Parties to the Treaty under the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF} represent an important contribution to the fulfilment of the undertaking provided for in Article 4,2 of the NPT. However, as reported by the Director General of the IAEA to this Conference, the income as a percentage of the target for the TCF has varied widely in the past decade. 
6. In this regard, my Delegation shares the view that one of the major reasons for not only the unpredictability of the availability of funds, but also the ever-growing imbalance between the promotional and regulatory activities of the IAEA, was the inconsistent interpretation of, and adherence to the concept of voluntary contributions to the TCF. This may have arisen from the official reference to such contributions as "voluntary", despite the fact that the target figures for such contributions have been unanimously agreed to in the General Conferences of the IAEA. 
7. While it is true that the TCF has grown significantly, and that the Regular Budget of the IAEA has not grown at all in real terms, the number of States requesting technical assistance and co-operation activities has also increased significantly over recent years. This has led to a decline in the potential resources of the TCF reflected by a significant gap between the agreed target for the TCF and the actual level of contribution, a declining share of footnote a/ projects, and a lack of agreement on the Indicative Planning Figures (IPF) for 2001 - 2002 as well as on the recommended target figures for 2003 - 2004. In the period under review, there was a continuous gap averaging 20% between the target and actual contributions and, even after taking into account additional funding from extra-budgetary and other sources, there was still a shortfall of 15% in meeting project requirements. These were projects identified to be responding to the real needs of developing States but were, however, constrained in their implementation only due to limited resources. 
8. While we note that, for the period 1995-1999, extra-budgetary resources did not increase in tandem with increasing TCF targets, nevertheless, my Delegation would wish to take this opportunity to accord due recognition to all States, in particular major donors, that have contributed extra-budgetary resources on top of their assessed contribution to the TCF. 
9. For the future, there is an obvious need to renew and enhance the political commitment of all Member States, particularly among NPT Member States of the IAEA, to make the resources available to the TCF more predictable. This is in line with their undertaking and responsibilities under the Treaty. All principal sources of funding, whether voluntary, negotiated, or extrabudgetary, should be addressed and explored to ensure an appropriate mix. The TCF should continue to serve as the main vehicle for the mobilisation of technical co-operation and any unpredictability in its funding will clearly weaken one of the three pillars of the IAEA as well as one half of the bargain in the NPT. 
10. Current uncertainty in TCF funding, resulting from changes in recent pledging and payment patterns, will have a profound effect on future financing of the IAEA's technical cooperation and assistance programme. With rising cost and increasing demand for technical cooperation and assistance, efforts should be made to ensure no reduction in available funds to finance current and future projects. Any reduction may undermine the balance between the major IAEA activities and the NPT provisions. In this regard, Malaysia is sympathetic to the idea of the creation of a mandatory NPT Technical Co-operation Fund for the benefit of NPT States Parties, to be managed by the IAEA to supplement and further improve the predictability of the voluntary TCF. 
11. My Delegation also believes that, with a successful resolution of these issues, more can be achieved by the IAEA in the area of technical co-operation. In this respect, Malaysia will continue to honour her financial commitment to the IAEA, including the contribution to the TCF and the assessed programme costs. Malaysia firmly believes that, while the implementation of NPT safeguards is an important obligation of the IAEA, equitable consideration and weight must also be given to its other major statutory roles, particularly technical co-operation, which seems to relatively be lagging in emphasis and more or less side-lined. 
12. In spite of these budgetary constraints, IAEA technical co-operation programme delivery remains commendable. However, the Technical Co-operation Department of the IAEA should be assured of adequate funding from the regular budget to ensure effective and efficient implementation of its technical co-operation activities. 
13. While Malaysia's participation in the IAEA Technical Co-operation Programme used to be almost exclusively as a recipient State in the early days, we are now repaying the gesture in a small way by giving back the knowledge and skills acquired to the international community by assisting other developing Member States in the field of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. This is consistent with our view that technical co-operation, whether bilateral, regional, or otherwise, is an important confidence-building measure in encouraging Member States to be more transparent in their national nuclear programmer, thus deterring the misuse of nuclear technology or the diversion of nuclear materials for non-peaceful purpose. 
14. We are also of the view that national nuclear technology programmes cannot be developed in isolation from international institutions. We encourage the development of stronger linkages between developing Member States through the IAEA's mechanism for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC). 
15. Finally, Mr. Chairman, my Delegation believes that the imminent rise in the cost of implementing additional measures in safeguards will affect the current "voluntary" financing of technical co-operation in the near term. It is with this thought in mind that Malaysia is closely following the development of the proposal to establish a Nuclear Arms Control Verification (NACV) Fund to finance future IAEA involvement in the verification of nuclear arms control and reduction measures, particularly the option paper on financing that is being prepared by the Director General of the IAEA. It is our hope that the assessed contribution for the funding of such disarmament verification measures be weighted towards the nuclear weapon States, so as to minimise the negative repercussions on future state of the "voluntary" TCF. 
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 

