Statement by

Tharron McIvor
Deputy Permanent Representative, Vienna

at the

2018 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III

Geneva, May 2018

Chair
Like other NPT states, New Zealand contributes to and benefits from advances in
nuclear science in a number of areas including agriculture, human health and
environmental management. We also recognise the contribution of nuclear
applications and technology to developing countries and meeting the sustainable
development goals.
In this regard, it is New Zealand’s view that the IAEA's Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI)
has a key role to play and we have been pleased to support a number of projects
through the PUI, such as monitoring radioactivity in the marine environment
following the Fukushima accident and responding to sustained drought in the Sahel
region. We also play an active role in projects under the auspices of the IAEA
Regional Cooperative Agreement in the Asia-Pacific region.
Chair
While, like others, we have decided not to include nuclear power in our own energy
mix, we also recognise the right of State Parties to the NPT to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes under Article IV of the Treaty. In doing so, we would like to
underscore that New Zealand is firm in its view that all countries developing and
using nuclear technology must apply the highest standards of safeguards, safety and
security to all nuclear facilities and material and across the full nuclear fuel cycle. For
New Zealand, our Radiation Safety Act, which recently entered into force, enables us
to effectively meet our own international obligations relating to radiation protection,
safety, security and nuclear non-proliferation.
New Zealand is also aware of the risks involved in holding and using nuclear energy.
For New Zealand, and many of our regional neighbours, the Fukushima accident
reinforced the importance of continued vigilance and transparency on nuclear safety
issues. It also clearly demonstrated that nuclear accidents do not respect national
boundaries.
This would be particularly true for an accident occurring during the maritime
transport of nuclear material. New Zealand continues to actively promote the safe
transport of radioactive material, at the IAEA and other relevant forums. We are
strongly of the view that it is essential that those transporting radioactive material
adopt and apply the highest possible safety standards, and that coastal and other
interested States receive notification in advance of relevant shipments. New Zealand
was pleased to join a number of coastal and shipping states at the IAEA in agreeing

voluntary best practice guidelines on communication to apply to certain shipments of
radioactive material. We value the ongoing dialogue and cooperation between
interested coastal and shipping states in implementing these guidelines, and thank
the United Kingdom and Ireland for their leadership of this dialogue at this time. We
also welcome efforts to improve the international nuclear liability regime and will
continue to work with others to ensure the concerns of non-nuclear coastal states are
taken into account.
Chair
New Zealand remains committed to strengthening nuclear security. The potential
humanitarian, economic and environmental consequences of terrorists gaining access
to nuclear or radioactive materials are so grave, that the New Zealand Government is
doing all within its power to minimise the possibility of this nightmare becoming a
reality. In our view, the IAEA’s work on nuclear security is indispensable, including for
states like New Zealand with small quantities of nuclear and radioactive material. We
commend the IAEA’s IPPAS missions as a valuable tool to provide helpful and
pragmatic assistance for securing nuclear and radioactive material.
In this regard, we are pleased to announce a further contribution to the IAEA Nuclear
Security Fund of NZD150,000. We are also supporting a range of regional training
activities in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, including a workshop in Thailand run by
the World Institute of Nuclear Security, and projects in collaboration with US and
Australia to improve nuclear detection and nuclear forensics respectively. Effective
nuclear security is in all of our interests, and we call on all states to maintain at all
times effective security of all nuclear and other radioactive material, including the
85% of material used for non-civilian purposes.
Chair
In closing, New Zealand recalls the Vienna Group of Ten statement and working paper
and commends the Group’s set of recommendations for your attention when
addressing the ‘Vienna issues.’
Thank you Chair.

