NEW ZEALAND

Statement by

New Zealand

at the

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons

Main Committee III

New York, May 2015

Check against delivery

INTS-89-121

Page 2 of 3

Mr Chairman
New Zealand and New Zealanders contribute to and benefit from advances in
nuclear science across fields as diverse as human health, water management and
food quality. While we have decided not to include nuclear power in our own
energy mix, we nevertheless recognise the right of State Parties to the NPT to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under Article IV of the
Treaty. New Zealand is equally firm in its view that all countries developing and
using nuclear energy must apply the highest standards of safeguards, safety and
security through all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, including transport and
waste management.
The IAEA's Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) has a key role to play in faCilitating the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology. New Zealand has been pleased to support
PUI projects monitoring radioactivity in the marine environment from the
Fukushima accident and responding to sustained drought in the Sahel region. We
were also pleased to host last year the annual meeting of the Regional
Cooperative Agreement (RCA) for Research, Development and Training in
Nuclear Science and Technology for the Asia-Pacific region which promotes and
coordinates cooperative research, development and training projects in nuclear
science and technology.
Mr Chairman,
It is now more than four years since the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant
accident which has provided the impetus for a renewed international focus on
nuclear safety. New Zealand commends and fully supports the on-going efforts
of the IAEA to coordinate and share lessons learned from Fukushima. For New
Zealand, and many of our regional neighbours, the accident reinforced the
importance of continued vigilance and transparency on nuclear safety issues. It
also clearly demonstrated that nuclear accidents do not respect national
boundaries. And this is particularly true for an accident occurring during the
maritime transport of nuclear material.

New Zealand continues to actively promote the safe transport of radioactive
material, at the IAEA and other relevant forums. It is essential that the highest
possible safety standards are adopted and applied by those transporting
radioactive material, and that coastal and other interested States receive
notification in advance of shipments. In September 2013 New Zealand was
pleased to join a number of coastal and shipping states at the IAEA in agreeing
voluntary best practice guidelines on communication to apply to certain
shipments of radioactive material. We look forward to their implementation and
to participating in a table-top exercise to test the guidelines, to take place in
Vienna next month. We also welcome efforts to improve the international
INTS-89-121

Page 3 of 3

nuclear liability regime and will continue to work with others to ensure the
concerns of non-nuclear coastal states are taken into account.
Mr Chairman,
New Zealand remains actively engaged in international efforts to strengthen
nuclear security, including through participation in the Nuclear Security Summits
and through our funding of the IAEA's Nuclear Security Fund. New Zealand
considers the Agency's work on nuclear security as vital. We have contributed
regularly to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, most recently NZ$100,000 earlier
this year, and we look forward to participating in the Nuclear Security Conference
in December 2016.
New Zealand is also a strong supporter of a range of other international
initiatives designed to strengthen the global nuclear security framework. We are
regular contributors to the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction, to which we have donated more than $7 million over the last
decade. Later this year, we look forward to hosting a regional table top exercise
under the auspices of the Proliferation Security Initiative to strengthen efforts to
counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related materials.
Mr Chairman,
New Zealand remains committed to efforts to promote disarmament and nonproliferation education. In New Zealand, funding is available through the Peace
and Disarmament Education Trust for postgraduate research aimed at promoting
international peace, arms control and disarmament. The Disarmament Education
United Nations Implementation Fund supports the work of New Zealanders in
promoting progress towards disarmament and non-proliferation, including in
relation to nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
New Zealand regrets that progress on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy has
not been matched by progress on nuclear disarmament. This lack of progress on
disarmament undermines the mutually-reinforcing nature of the three pillars and
challenges the integrity and authority of the NPT. We can and must do better.
Thank you Mr Chairman

INTS-89-121

