
Mr. Chairman,	
At the outset, I wish to associate myself with the statement by Indonesia on behalf of the NAM NPT Group of States.
2.	The NPT is an agreement and a bargain where every State-Party is required to show great faithfulness, especially because of its indefinite nature. The realisation that the treaty has come to stay should compel States-Parties to work harder at ensuring that all provisions of the treaty are implemented judiciously, for the achievement of the set-out objectives in the interest of global nuclear security and socio-economic development.
3.	Article IV of the NPT establishes the inalienable right of all States Parties to develop and conduct research into the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination, and in conformity with Articles I and II, as well as Axticle III of the Treaty. This right necessarily comes with obligations, including the observance of non-proliferation commitments, the implementation of IAEA safeguards and the transparent pursuit of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
4.	Nigeria continues to display firm commitment to the NPT. As a
responsible State-Party to the treaty and member of the IAEA, Nigeria has signed and ratified the Additional Protocol to her Safeguard Agreement with the Agencv, as well as all relevant
conventions and treaties on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, nuclear safety and nuclear security. Nigeria, like indeed other non-nuclear weapons States-Parties of the NPT, need$.to have the full assurance that her rights to pursue peaceful nuclear
development will not be impeded under any guise. As a country with
 a huge population and enormous need for energy for development,

Nigeria considers nuclear electricity as a viable and appropriate option to pursue, and is therefore working with IAEA in a transparent manner, and to put in place an enduring culture of nuclear safety and nuclear security in all its ramification.
Mr. Chairman,
5.	In view of the foregoing, and in accordance with the statute of the IAEA, Nigeria would like all concerns on the assurance of nuclear fuel supply to be properly addressed during this review process. All attempts to discourage peaceful nuclear activities on grounds of their alleged sensitivity must seize. All proposakand decisions on assuring nuclear fuel supply by any one country or group ojj" countries must be consistent with all the relevant articles of the NPT and in accordance with the Statute of the IAEA.
6.	Furthermore, Mr. Chairman, the promotion of peaceful nuclear application that is made accessible to all that legitimately seek it, is of utmost importance to the viability and sustenance of the NPT. The IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is the means of ensuring the access of States to peaceful nuclear application and must, therefore, be adequately and predictably funded in order for States to fully
enjoy the benefit of membership of the NPT and the legitimate recompense of their sacrifices in promotion of nuclear non-proliferation.
