The Nigerian delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT. In addition, we would like to reiterate the following salient points regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The Nigerian delegation recognizes the important role which the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) plays in promoting nuclear non-proliferation. We attach utmost importance to the Agency's roie as the global focal point for technical cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as in the field of nuclear verification and safeguards.
We recognize that energy security is an indispensable component in the maintenance and improvement of the quality of lives of majority of the people in the developing world. Consequently Member States have continued to express interest in exploiting and expanding nuclear energy for their benefit. It therefore becomes imperative that as we promote this energy resource, we must ensure nuclear non-proliferation, safety and security.
There is also the need to establish a balance between security concerns and the socioeconomic benefits it portends for development, especially in developing countries. In (his regard, we wish to stress that Article IV of the Treaty guarantees the inalienable rights of all States Parties to the Treaty to develop, research, produce and use unclear energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination in so far as it is in conformity with relevant articles of the Treaty.
The on-going proposals on an international fuel cycle facilities and fuel assurances wilt proof useful if it would provide efficient, cost effective, reliable and adequate proliferation safeguards. The facility should however not be restricted to Member States by the imposition of unnecessary limitation on transfer of nuclear material, equipment or technology for peaceful purposes, as this would amount to a violation of Article 111 of the NPT.
In recent years, developing countries continue to stress the need for the funding of the Agency's Technical Cooperation (TC) activities to be sufficient, predictable and assured. They have equally expressed the need for the voluntary TC budget to be increased to enable it undertake its statutory mandate. In this regard, we call on Member States for allocation of more resources to the TC budget of the IAEA.
At this crucial stage of its national development, Nigeria requires access to necessary technology for its socio-economic development, including electricity demands for industrialization, which is expected to exceed current generating capacity levels five folds. Nuclear energy, which is also environmentally safer for this level of national and social development, therefore becomes the only affordable option.
We commend the IAEA for all its strategic projects capable of providing the required impetus for accelerated and sustainable economic development and enhance the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG's).
My delegation believes that the implementation and strengthening of the NPT is the responsibility of all States Parties and that the best way to strengthen the nucfear non-proliferation regime is through full compliance by all States Parties, without exceptions, with the provisions of the Treaty.
t thank you.