Statement by Norway, PrepCom II - Cluster III, 1 May 2018
Check against delivery
Mr Chair,
Norway fully recognises the inalienable right to peaceful use of nuclear energy and
technology the the states parties to the Treaty. States parties that comply with their
safeguards obligations under the NPT and the Additional Protocol inspire confidence in
the peaceful nature of their nuclear activities. Nuclear energy developments must be
based on the highest possible safety and security standards.
We have previously witnessed excess stocks of highly enriched uranium for weapons
purposes being brought under IAEA safeguards, and subsequently used for generating
electricity. In other words, nuclear disarmament can actually contribute to peaceful use.
Multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle offer opportunities for countries
seeking to reap the benefits of nuclear energy, without having to develop costly
enrichment or reprocessing facilities. Norway has contributed USD 5 million to the IAEA
Low Enriched Uranium Bank Facility in Kazakhstan, and we were pleased to be present
at its inauguration. This facility is a good example of how peaceful uses and nonproliferation can mutually support each other, as well as supporting our nuclear
disarmament agenda.
As a coastal state, Norway is particularly concerned to ensure that radioactive materials
are transported in accordance with the highest standards of safety, security and
environmental protection. We have noted the increased interest of certain states in the
development of transportable nuclear power plants, and their use at sea. One such vessel
is already at an advanced state of manufacture.
The transport of fuelled nuclear power plants by sea raises a number of questions and
challenges, both of a regulatory and of a technical nature. Before any sea transport of a
fuelled reactor can take place, the consensus of the relevant coastal states is essential. The
Norwegian Government is pleased to see that the will to find such consensus is present.
In the light of this, Norway welcomes the IAEA’s efforts to identify, understand and
address key regulatory challenges associated with the deployment of small modular
reactors (SMRs) and transportable nuclear power plants. Norway also welcomes the
IAEA’s efforts to develop a strategic approach to the issue of transportable reactors and
notes that this work will call for coordination between the IAEA and the IMO. In due
course, this work should address any gaps in the Agency’s existing safety standards,
guidance and regulations.
Norway calls for the full universalisation of relevant legally binding international
instruments in the field of nuclear security and safety. The prime responsibility for
safety and security lies with the states concerned. Nonetheless, we emphasise the urgent
need to further enhance international partnerships, technical cooperation, best
practices, peer-review mechanisms and other forms of assistance in this area. Given its
unique expertise, reputation and mandate, the IAEA has a vital role to play in
coordinating efforts to strengthen the international safety and security architecture.

Norway maintains its position that the IAEA’s regular budget for nuclear safety and
security should be increased. It is also important to continuously engage with the
nuclear industry and relevant private sector actors on these matters.
Improved nuclear security will provide a more enabling environment for peaceful
applications of nuclear science. For many years, a key priority for Norway has been the
minimisation of the use of highly enriched uranium in civilian nuclear installations.
Norway will host the third international symposium on this issue on 5-7 June this year
in Oslo.
Mr Chair,
Norway joins other states parties in stressing that peaceful applications of nuclear
technologies go far beyond the generation of electricity. Isotopes have important uses in
several sectors, including health, food production, water management, environmental
monitoring, and conservation of cultural heritage.
Broader nuclear applications such as these will continue to form a large part of the IAEA
technical cooperation programme. We urge all states parties to pay their assessed share
to the IAEA TC Fund in time, and to consider other voluntary contributions. Norway has
provided funding for the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) and the Nuclear Security Fund,
and we will continue to do so. We should all bear in mind that Article IV of the NPT is
highly relevant for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Indeed, the IAEA is becoming an increasingly important partner in the efforts to
promote sustainable development. However, it is important that these efforts are
carried out in close cooperation and coordination with other relevant UN agencies and
international organisations. We encourage the IAEA to continue to strengthen
cooperative arrangements in these fields.

Thank you.

