2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee 3

4 May 2015
Statement by Norway

Mr. Chairman,
First, let me congratulate you on your election to lead this important Committee. I can assure
you of my delegation's full support.

Mr. Chairman,
Norway affirms the right of all Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPI) Parties to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes without discrimination, and in conformity with the Treaty. Equally, we
recognize that this right comes with the obligation to ensure that all nuclear activities are
carried out in accordance with the highest standards of safety, security and non-proliferation.

The NPT provides the framework for international confidence and cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which plays an essential role in a number of areas central
to human development: health, water management, agriculture, food safety and nutrition,
energy and environmental protection. At the heart of this framework stands the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Considering the expected growth in nuclear power, this
Agency is more important than ever.

(Check against delivery)
Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations, 825 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022.
Phone: (212) 421-0828 Fax: (212) 688-0554 www.norway-un.org

For Norway, supporting the IAEA is crucial. While we expect the Agency to carry out its
tasks efficiently and fairly, we also accept that this work comes at a financial cost. Norway
intends to step up its efforts, including financial support for projects under the Peaceful Uses
Initiative.

Mr. Chairman,
Since the last review conference, the Fukushima accident has reminded us of the risks
related to nuclear power plants. Our obligation is to learn from the accident, to improve the
safety standards and to make sure that standards are turned into action. Again, the IAEA is
central.

To a coastal state like Norway, transport safety is a particular priority, and we appreciate the
on-going cooperation between coastal states and states that transport radioactive materials.
This dialogue was also called for through action 62 of the Action Plan.

Mr. Chairman,
Peaceful uses also comes with a responsibility, and the implementation of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional Protocols with the IAEA are
essential in this respect. These tools strengthens the protection of our collective security
and facilitate peaceful uses.

The Nuclear Security Summits have contributed substantially to nuclear security and to
keeping fissile material beyond the reach of terrorists. Norway urges all States that have not
yet done so to become party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its 2005 Amendment as soon as possible. The same applies to the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

We recognize the central role of the IAEA in strengthening the nuclear security framework
globally and in coordinating international activities in the field of nuclear energy. The goal
must be to secure all fissile materials. It is encouraging that a growing number of civilian
research reactors now are being converted to use low enriched uranium. In Norway, we have
discontinued the use of highly radioactive sources in our hospitals.

On all these issues, it is our opinion that the Working Paper presented by the Vienna Group
of 10 provides useful guidance in summarizing core focus areas for responsible peaceful use.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

