Mr. Chair,
Norway fully supports the right to peaceful use as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty.
Civilian nuclear applications are much more than nuclear energy. Norway attaches great importance in facilitating the use of nuclear technology for all - also in the health sector, agriculture, water management and environmental monitoring. Peaceful nuclear applications represent an important contribution to our joint efforts at reaching the UN Millennium Development Goals.
Although Norway has refrained from producing nuclear energy, we (fully) acknowledge the right of others to utilize nuclear power and determine their own energy mix.
Norway has taken note of different forecasts estimating that the use of nuclear energy will increase in the years to come. While nuclear energy may have a positive impact on efforts to reduce emission of green house gases such use may also have potentially severe environmental implications. Ways to handle the large and increasing quantities of nuclear waste in all its aspects in a safe, secure and environmentally sound way must be found. Sufficient resources must be set aside in the search for sustainable and environmentally sound solutions.
Mr. Chair,
From a Norwegian perspective it is vital that peaceful uses of nuclear technology do not undermine non-proliferation efforts, nuclear security and safety.
For this reason Norway welcomes suggestions to make the nuclear fuel cycle more resistant to nuclear proliferation. Norway strongly supports efforts to reduce the number of vulnerable fuel cycle facilities and the use of high risk materials, such as highly enriched uranium in all types of nuclear facilities.
Norway advocates renewed international efforts for developing multilateral nuclear fuel cycle arrangements, which are proliferation resistant and also take into account the concerns of developing countries.
Norway, therefore, fully supports the establishment of a nuclear fuel reserve under the auspices of the IAEA. On 26lh February this year, the Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs announced at an International Conference on Nuclear Disarmament in Oslo a contribution of USD 5 millions to such a fuel bank. We consider such a fuel bank to be an important first step towards developing an equitable multilateral framework for the nuclear fuel cycle that provides assurances against supply disruptions and strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. We encourage other countries to contribute as well. It is our hope that we during the Review Process could address this, also reflecting the needs of developing countries.
Nuclear safety covers a range of important activities. Within the framework of the Agency a number of important instruments have been developed. Besides the normative functions, the IAEA provides expertise and technical assistance to member states in implementing their safety obligations.
Within the Governing Board of the Agency, Norway has called for long-term sustainable and predictable funding of the Agency's safety activities.
Norway has on number of occasions welcomed and supported IAEAs fundamental principles for nuclear safety. These principles provide a general and integrated guidance on requirements and responsibilities to ensure the fundamental safety objective of protecting people and the environment from harmful effects of ionizing radiation.
These safety principles place particular responsibility on the operators to ensure adequate safety standards and practices as well as on governmental agencies to put in place and enforce effective legal and regulatory frameworks.
While nuclear safety is a national responsibility, radiation risks may transcend national borders. International cooperation serves to control hazards, prevent accidents, respond to emergencies and mitigate consequences.
Norway supports and adheres to all international conventions, codes of conduct and guidelines encompassing the global nuclear safety regime. Particularly, Norway continues to advocate universal adherence to the Conventions on Nuclear Safety, Early Notification and Assistance, the Joint Convention on Spent Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management, and the Codes of Conduct on Radioactive Sources and Research Reactors. Norway emphasizes the importance of States Parties continue to assess their own performance under these Conventions and Codes.