Innlegg – PrepCom I - Cluster III
Mr. Chair,
Norway fully recognizes the inalienable right for peaceful uses of the States
parties to the Treaty. By abiding to the NPT safeguards obligation, and through
the Additional protocol, a State Party improves confidence in the peaceful nature
of its nuclear activities. Developing nuclear energy must be based on the highest
possible safety, security and non-proliferation standards.
We have previously witnessed that excess stocks of highly enriched uranium for
weapons purposes have been brought under IAEA safeguards and subsequently
used for generating electricity. Nuclear disarmament can actually contribute to
peaceful uses.
Multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle provide avenues for countries
seeking to reap benefits of nuclear energy, without having to develop costly
enrichment or reprocessing facilities. In previous years, Norway has contributed
to the IAEA efforts in this area. We believe such approaches serve both nuclear
non-proliferation and peaceful use.
As a costal state, however, Norway has a particular concern in ensuring that
transport of radioactive materials are consistent with relevant international
standards of safety, security and environmental protection.
Norway calls for the full universalization of relevant international legally binding
instruments in the field of nuclear security and safety. The prime responsibility
for safety and security lies with the country concerned. Nonetheless, we fully
recognize the need to enhance international partnerships, technical cooperation
as well as forms of assistance in this area. The IAEA’s role in this regard is key.
Norway reiterates that we would like to see a sufficient amount of the IAEA
regular budget devoted to nuclear safety and security. The Agency is also an
essential partner in promoting best practices. Furthermore, there is a need to
engage the nuclear industry and private sector on these matters.
Mr. Chair,
Peaceful applications of nuclear technologies go far beyond mere generation of
nuclear power. Isotopes are crucial in sectors such as health, food productions,
water management, environmental monitoring and cultural preservation. Hence,
article IV of the NPT is highly relevant for achieving the Sustainable Strategic
Development Goals.
Wider nuclear applications must continue to form a large part of the IAEA
technical cooperation program. We urge all States Parties pay their assessed
share to the IAEA TC Fund in time, and consider other voluntary contributions.
Recently, Norway provided funds to the Peaceful Uses initiative (PUI). Parts of
our contribution were earmarked for the application of nuclear technology in
combatting ebola. We would also like to highlight the importance the IAEA

Program of Action for Cancer Therapy.
The IAEA is becoming an increasingly important partner for promoting
sustainable development. This task must, however, be carried out in close
cooperation and coordination with other relevant agencies. We are pleased to
observe that the IAEA is actively engaged in such cooperative arrangements.

Thank you.

