NEW ZEALAND
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER THREE DEBATE
STATEMENT BY MS. DEBORAH PANCKHURST
HEAD, DISARMAMENT AND ARMS CONTROL UNIT
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE
30 APRIL 2013

Check against delivery
Mr Chairman
As a strong advocate of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, New Zealand recognises that it is only
through equal implementation of each of the pillars that our shared objective of a nuclear weapons
free world will be realised.
As the 2010 Review Conference noted, the NPT provides a framework of international confidence
and cooperation within which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can take place. This framework is
not just confined to Article IV, but applies to all of the three pillars, which must be implemented in
their entirety.
Like other NPT states, New Zealand benefits from the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. In fields such as agriculture, human health and environmental management, New
Zealanders contribute to and benefit from advances in nuclear SCience, both in our own national
institutions and in cooperation with others.
New Zealand's international engagement on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is particularly
directed to supporting cooperation on non-power applications within our region, for example,
through the International Atomic Energy Agency's Peaceful Uses Initiative and the Regional
Cooperative Agreement.
New Zealand joins others in recognising the right to decide to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes as part of the existing or planned energy mix for a number of countries and in conformity
with Articles I, II, III and IV of the NPT.
For New Zealand the generation of electricity through the use of nuclear energy is not an option we
intend to utilise. We emphaSise, however, that the development and use of nuclear energy must be
accompanied, through all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, by the highest standards of safety and
security, waste management and disposal and non-proliferation safeguards.
In this light, the tragic Fukushima nuclear accident and its aftermath reinforced the interest of all
countries in ensuring that international nuclear safety and security standards are adhered to and
constantly reviewed and updated as technologies improve.

New Zealand greatly appreciates the Conference hosted by the Japanese Government and the IAEA
in December last year. This meeting was useful both as a practical measure for us to assess our
progress but also as a symbol of the collective political will of all states to achieve the highest
possible standard of global nuclear safety.
New Zealand also acknowledges the many reports disseminated by Japan and the IAEA international
fact-finding and Peer Review missions on the accident and its aftermath. These, in tandem with the
ongoing International Experts Meetings and safety assessments, have allowed critical discussion and
review of efforts to respond to the Fukushima disaster. Two years on, the IAEA's Nuclear Safety
Action Plan remains a credible response to the accident but it is essential that the Action Plan be a
living document that is reviewed and updated, and not simply left to sit on a shelf.
The importance of enhanced transparency is one of the key lessons that we have learned from
Fukushima. Effective, transparent communication, both before, during, and after an incident, can
help ensure adequate and timely responses occur on the basis of scientific and objective
information. Close cooperation between local, national and international authorities can further
assist in properly informing both decision-makers and the public in the event of an accident. This is
particularly important given the potential for ramifications beyond national boundaries.
For New Zealand such openness should include communication on shipments of radioactive material,
by air, land or sea, which are an inevitable by-product of growth in the use of nuclear energy.
New Zealand is particularly concerned to ensure that such shipments are conducted in the highest
possible safety and security conditions. Communication between shipping and other interested
states should be timely, transparent and take place within a well-defined framework, including
proper emergency preparedness and response systems. We welcome the work underway in the IAEA
in this area, including efforts to improve the international nuclear liability regime.
Like a nuclear accident, the consequences of a deliberate act of nuclear terrorism would not be
confined to a single state. New Zealand is an active participant in the Nuclear Security Summit
process, believing that it provides an essential impetus, at the highest political level, to global efforts
to ensure the ongoing security of nuclear and radiological materials. The communique issued by the
leaders gathered in Seoul last year referred to initiatives to improve global nuclear security through
international cooperation, such as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Global
Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. New Zealand
contributes actively to both and believes firmly in the very practical value that they add to our work.
New Zealand welcomes the IAEA's High-Level Conference on Nuclear Security to be held in Vienna in
July this year which aims enhance coordination of international nuclear security initiatives among
member states. The Agency's work on nuclear security is indispensable, and New Zealand is
pleased to assist that effort by contributing regularly to the IAEA's Nuclear Security Fund. We also
support the work of the World Institute for Nuclear Security on initiatives to strengthen nuclear
security including in our region. We look forward to continuing to engage actively within the Agency
on nuclear security as this important work evolves.
The last three years have seen a renewed international focus on both nuclear safety and nuclear
security. Both are vital and entail not only national rights, but also global responsibilities. All of us
have a stake in ensuring that we continually strive for the highest possible standards.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

2

