NEW ZEALAND
PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF
THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS

CLUSTER THREE DEBATE

STATEMENT BY H.E. PHILIP GRlFFlTHS
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN VIENNA

9 MAY 2012

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
New Zealand joins others in recognising the right of countries to decide to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in conformity with Articles I, 11, Ill and IV of the
Treaty. As the 2010 Review Conference noted, the NPT provides a framework of
international confidence and cooperation within which the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy can take place. This framework is not just confined to Article IV, but applies
to all of the three pillars, which must be implemented in their entirety.
Like others, New Zealand benefits from the right to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy under the NPT. In fields such as human health, food quality and safety, crop
improvement, sustainable land and water management, pest control, water and
environmental management, New Zealanders contribute to and benefit from
advances in nuclear science, both in our own national institutions and in cooperation
with others.
Mr Chairman
The generation of electricity through the use of nuclear energy is not an option New
Zealand intends to utilise, but nuclear power forms part of the existing or planned
energy mix for a number of countries. We emphasise that the development and use
of nuclear energy must be accompanied, through all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle,
by the highest standards of safety and security, waste management and disposal
and non-proliferation safeguards. The risks of lapses in these areas are not confined
to national boundaries. Shipments of radioactive material, by air, land or sea, are an
inevitable by-product of growth in the use of nuclear energy. New Zealand is
concerned to ensure that such shipments are conducted in the highest possible
safety and security conditions, and that communication between shipping and other
interested states is timely, transparent and takes place within a well-defined
framework, including proper emergency preparedness and response systems.
Improving the international nuclear liability regime remains a priority for New
Zealand.
New Zealand's international engagement on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is
particularly directed to supporting cooperation on non-power applications within our
region, such as through our participation in the IAEA's Peaceful Uses Initiative where
we have contributed to the marine benchmark study on the possible impact of
Fukushima radioactive releases in Asia-Pacific, and through the IAEA1s Regional
Cooperation Arrangement (RCA) where we support regional projects related to
agriculture, the environment and human health. In this context, I am very pleased to
announce today a further contribution of NZ$100,000 in 2012 to the PUI project on
coordinating international research on ocean acidification.

Mr Chairman
The tragic Fukushima nuclear accident last year was a sobering reminder of the
inherent danger of the atom. The accident and its aftermath reinforced the interest
of all countries in ensuring not only that international nuclear safety and security
standards are adhered to, but that those standards are constantly reviewed and
updated as technologies improve. While safety and security are national
responsibilities, international cooperation through the IAEA is essential to providing
global assurances and maintaining public confidence in a safety and security
framework that protects the interests of all, nuclear and non-nuclear countries alike.
The IAEA's nuclear safety action plan is a credible response to the Fukushima
accident and to our collective desire to strengthen the global safety regime. The
nuclear safety action plan must be built upon and implemented in full.
Like a nuclear accident, the consequences of a deliberate act of nuclear terrorism
would not be confined to a single state. New Zealand is an active participant in the
Nuclear Security Summit process, believing that it provides an essential impetus, at
the highest political level, to global efforts to ensure the ongoing security of nuclear
and radiological materials. The communique issued by the leaders gathered in
Seoul in March this year referred to initiatives to improve global nuclear security
through international cooperation, such as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials
of Mass Destruction. New Zealand contributes actively to both and believes firmly in
the value that they add to our work.
We welcome the intention of the IAEA to convene a conference in 2013 aimed at
ensuring greater coordination of international nuclear security initiatives. The
Agency's own work on nuclear security is indispensable, and New Zealand is
pleased to assist that work by contributing regularly to the IAEA's Nuclear Security
Fund. We also support the work of the World Institute for Nuclear Security on
initiatives to strengthen nuclear security including in our region.
Mr Chairman
International developments in the last two years have reminded us that the use of
nuclear energy entails not only national rights, but also global responsibilities. The
renewed international focus on both safety and security is vital and must continue.

