PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OFTHE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OFNUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER THREE DEBATE
STATEMENT BYJOSEPH BALLARD
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

Mr Chairman
As a strong supporter of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, New Zealand remains committed to
progress across its three pillars. We are dedicated to achieving a world free of nuclear weapons and we
continue to encourage all efforts – both traditional and innovative - to realise this goal.
Like other NPT states, New Zealand enjoys the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in
conformity with articles I, II, III and IV of the NPT. New Zealanders contribute to and benefit from
advances in nuclear science across fields as diverse as human health, water management and food
quality. In this regard New Zealand is pleased to be an ongoing supporter of the Peaceful Uses
Initiative, including through our most recent contribution of NZ$50,000 earlier this year.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand does not intend to utilise nuclear energy to generate electricity but we recognise that
nuclear power forms part of the existing or planned energy mix for a number of countries. We
emphasise that all countries developing and using nuclear energy must apply the highest standards of
safeguards, safety and security through all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, including transport and
waste management.
The international community is still learning the lessons of the tragic nuclear accident at Fukushima in
2011. Much valuable work has been done by the IAEA and its member states to strengthen the global
nuclear safety regime. But we must not allow progress to lead to complacency. New Zealand is closely
monitoring progress in implementation of the Nuclear Safety Action Plan, agreed at a high-level
meeting of IAEA member states following the accident.For New Zealand, and many of our regional
neighbours, the accident reinforced the importance of continued vigilance and transparency on nuclear
safety issues. New Zealand’s recent contribution to the PUI will be going directly towards sustaining the
IAEA’s post-Fukushima marine monitoring project in the Asia Pacific.
Mr Chairman
As Fukushima clearly demonstrated, nuclear accidents do not respect national boundaries. As a
country that has not chosen nuclear power for itself, New Zealand is nevertheless still susceptible to
suffering damage as a result of a nuclear accident elsewhere. This is particularly true for an accident
occurring during the maritime transport of nuclear material.
New Zealand remains concerned to ensure that such shipments are conducted in the highest possible
safety and security conditions and that communication between shipping and other interested states is
timely, transparent and takes place within a well-defined framework, including proper emergency
preparedness and response systems. We welcome the work underway in the IAEA in this area,

including efforts to improve the international nuclear liability regime. In this context New Zealand is
pleased to have played a constructive role in the Agency Working Group that concluded in late 2013
whichagreed best practice guidelines for systematic and timely communication between the
governments of shipping and coastal states. We look forward to their implementation and would
welcome any additional progress on voluntary measures by the states concerned.
Mr Chairman
Like nuclear safety, nuclear security is an issue of global importance, not least because of its
transboundary implications. New Zealand was particularly pleased to participate in 2013 in the
International Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global Efforts hosted by the IAEA in Vienna.
That Conference highlighted the central role of the Agency in supporting Member States to meet their
nuclear security obligations and in coordinating international activities in the field of nuclear security.
New Zealand considers the Agency’s work on nuclear security to be indispensable, and has contributed
regularly to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, most recently NZ$100,000 earlier this year.
New Zealand is also a strong supporter of a range of other international initiatives designed to
strengthen the global nuclear security framework. We are an active participant in the Nuclear Security
Summit process, believing that it provides an essential impetus at the highest political level, to global
efforts to ensure the ongoing security of nuclear and radiological materials. We are also regular
contributors to the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the G8 Global Partnership, to
which we have donated wellover $7 million over the last decade, and in 2015we will host a regional
table top exercise under the auspices of the Proliferation Security Initiative. We are preparing to
introduce legislation that will allow us to ratify both the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism.
The last three years have seen a renewed international focus on both nuclear safety and nuclear
security. Both are vital and entail not only national rights, but also global responsibilities. All of us
have a stake in ensuring that we continually strive for the highest possible standards.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

2

