THE PERMANENT MISSION OF
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

Statement by
H.E. Mr Robert G Aisi,
Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations
at the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster Three (Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy)
5 May 2014, New York
"Check against delivery"
Mr Chairman,
I congratulate you on your assumption of the Chair of the NPT Preparatory Committee for
the 2015 Review Conference and for your leadership in progressing its work. My delegation
assures you and all other stakeholders of our support.
Papua New Guinea associates itself with the statements made by Indonesia on behalf of
NAM at both the opening and the cluster group sessions.
We would also reiterate the pertinence of the joint statement New Zealand made in
October 2013 on behalf of 125 countries, including my own country - Papua New Guinea,
at the First Committee on the urgency and importance of addressing the Humanitarian
Consequences of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr Chairman
Papua New Guinea reaffirms her commitment to the NPT. We steadfastly maintain that the
total and irreversible disarmament and elimination of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction for global peace and security remains critical. This must continue to be
a priority for the United Nations and its Member States.
Genuine and lasting peace and security can only be achieved internationally without
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. There is absolutely no need for this
obnoxious weapons amongst our midst. The recent and the past catastrophic nuclear
incidents are stark reminders of why we do not need them anymore.

Permanent Mission of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations
201 East42nd Street, Suite 2411, New York, NY 10017
Tel. No. (212) 557-5001 ·Fax No. (212)557-5009 · E-Mail Address: pbonny@pngmission.org

Whilst we welcome recent international efforts by certain nuclear weapon State Parties
towards denuclearization, we urge for more concerted and strengthened efforts for
genuine disarmament of nuclear arsenals and other weapons of mass destruction,
including adherence to the principles of transparency, irreversibility and international
verifiability in all measures relating to the fulfillment of their nuclear disarmament
obligations under the NPT.
We again call for renewed global, regional and national efforts to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear weapons as an integral part of this process, if we are to be successful in this
endeavour.
Mr Chairman,
The use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is a principle that Papua New Guinea
respects and shares. This is a inalienable sovereign right of every country. This however,
should not be misconstrued for the application in areas other than for peaceful purposes.
For Papua New Guinea, as a State Party to the NPT, CTBT and the IAEA, we recognize the
importance of the civilian application of peaceful nuclear energy. In our health sector, for
example, the growing incidences of cancer, most notably in our womenfolk, is a area that
we are now working together with the IAEA and CTBTO and other development partners
including the UN, Australia, US and EU to harness medical technology that uses nuclear
technology for treatment of cancer. Other possible areas outside of the defence portfolio
under consideration are in education and agriculture development.
Another area that Papua New Guinea has been fostering international cooperation is the
promotion of nuclear non-proliferation activities with the CTBTO. We presently host four
(4) seismic, infrasound and radionuclide monitoring stations in strategic parts of the
country that contribute to monitoring and detection of nuclear test radiation. Recent
upgrade of the facilities now also assist our state of preparedness for disaster risk
reduction given that we are part ofthe "Pacific Rim of Fire."
In closing, Mr Chairman, Papua New Guinea remains convinced that the world does not
need nuclear arsenal for security, peace and survival. What we need instead is to see the
divestment of resources in this area and to put them to sustainable development of
humanity rather than preparing for Armageddon.
I thank you .

