PHILIPPINES

STATEMENT
Mr. RAPHAEL S.C. HERMOSO
Acting Executive Director
Office of the United Nations and International Organizations
Department of Foreign Affairs

Cluster 3 issues
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
5 May 2014
United Nations Headquarters

PHILIPPINE MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

556

FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY

10036 •

TEL.

(212) 764-1300 •

FAX

(212) 840-8602

PHILIPPINE INTERVENTION
Cluster 3 Issues
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
United Nations Headquarters
28 April to 09 May 2014
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Philippines aligns itself with the intervention made by the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Over the years, the Philippines, through active cooperation with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), has been able to harness the benefits of the
peaceful use of nuclear science and technology.
Through technical cooperation projects and human resource development
activities, the Philippines and the Agency have worked together in applying
nuclear science and technology to enhance my country's capabilities in a variety
of fields, including agriculture, industry, medicine and waste management.
The Philippines anchors the attainment of its development agenda through the
goals of inclusive growth, along with ecological responsibility for present and
future generations. In implementing this agenda, we recognize the important role
of science and technology in meeting our Millennium Development Goals.
Filipino scientists are developing smart-farming alternatives using isotope-based
techniques that will ultimately update obsolete farming methods, avoid large
wastage of resources notably fertilizer and water, and improve the production of
rice and corn.
On nuclear medicine, again with technical assistance from the IAEA, we
inaugurated the Technetium-99m generator production facility, the first in the
country. This facility is expected to cut at least 50 percent of hospital procedures,
making diagnostic tests more affordable, faster, and more accessible to a wider
segment of the population.
The Philippines lauds the Agency for its valuable work in the Programme for
Action for Cancer Therapy. We call on Member States and other funding
institutions to donate generously to this Programme.
In the area of addressing marine and coastal pollution, the Philippines has been
designated as a repository to coordinate and manage the regional Asia and

Pacific Marine Radioactivity Database, a live database useful in marine
monitoring among the countries in the region.
As the IAEA Collaborating Center on Harmful Algal Bloom Studies, we have
trained scientists from Cuba, El Salvador, and Oman on the receptor binding
assay (RBA) which measures the toxin that causes paralytic shellfish poisoning.
Mr. Chairman,
In the area of nuclear security, we have made improvements in our nuclear
security infrastructure and technical capacities. The Philippines is moving
towards establishing a more security-conscious culture for those stakeholders
responsible for radioactive and nuclear material.
We are working to improve our emergency response and mitigation capacities by
establishing planning and coordination mechanisms. We are also strengthening
the nuclear security legal framework by taking steps towards enacting domestic
legislation and pursuing the ratification of relevant international instruments.
The Philippines recalls the successful first IAEA International Conference on
Nuclear Security of July 2013. It allowed Member States to exchange views on
emerging trends and consider objectives for international nuclear security efforts.
We look forward to the elaboration of these objectives into concrete programs
with the development of the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan 2014-2017. The
Philippines recognizes the critical importance of nuclear security and considers it
as an 'enabler' rather than a constraint in the utilization of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. We wish to highlight the successful completion of the project
on Conditioning of Spent High Activity Radioactive Sources (SHARS) under a
trilateral cooperation agreement, which involved the Philippines, South Africa and
the Agency. Spent Co-60 sources were retrieved from source heads of
teletherapy machines and stored in secure stainless steel canisters ready for
disposal in boreholes when available. We thank the IAEA and the donor
countries of the Nuclear Security fund for supporting this project.
Mr. Chairman,
The growing global demand for energy has sustained the interest in nuclear
power, which means safety and security considerations will also increase and
should be commensurately addressed .
The Philippines supports the implementation of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety. We take note of the progress made in the implementation of the Action
Plan with full cooperation of the Member States especially in the safety
assessment worldwide based on the lessons learned from the Fukushima
accident, in strengthening national regulatory bodies and operating organizations

on nuclear safety, and in enhancing transparency and
communication with shareholders.

more effective

Recognizing the importance of regional cooperation in regulatory control, the
Philippines welcomes the establishment of the ASEAN Regulatory Network,
ASEANTOM and offers its full support towards realizing its goals and objectives.
In the Philippines, the National Radiological Emergency Preparedness and
Response Plan is being discussed by the country's National Disaster Risk
Reduction Management Council to incorporate lessons learned from the
Fukushima accident, and to operationalize the Plan at the community level.
One of the lessons learned from the Fukushima accident is the need for the
Philippines to establish an on-line network of radioactivity monitoring stations
around the country. Towards this end, we look forward to IAEA assistance for
the establishment of the network of eight stations, which can be upgraded to 16
to cover every region of the country.
In closing, the Philippines expresses its continued support for the IAEA as it
confronts challenges and issues complicated by political realities. We believe
that we cannot allow our gains to be eroded or erased by our differences. We
will continue to work with other States in the spirit of mutual respect,
transparency and constructive dialogue.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

