PHILIPPINE INTERVENTION
Cluster 3 Issues
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
2017 Preparatory Committee of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (N PT)

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Philippines aligns itself with the intervention made by the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The current review cycle marks the 50th anniversary of the entry into force of the
NPT, presenting an opportunity to look at the gains achieved, particularly on how
the NPT has made possible the exchange of nuclear energy, science and
technology’ to meet development goals. The Philippines is pleased that this
meeting is taking place in Vienna, enabling us to experience first-hand the
contributions of the Vienna-based international organizations to the NPT and the
broader non-proliferation regime. In particular, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), has discharged its mandate of accelerating and enlarging the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the
world. It has contributed to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals
and is poised to play a critical role in the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals,
The Philippines’ fruitful cooperation with the IAEA spans almost six decades and
has enabled the Philippines to harness nuclear science and technology for
development through the years. The recent 3rd Philippine Nuclear Congress
,
1
under the theme “Meeting Challenges through Nuclear Science and Technology
for Sustainable Growth”, graced by no less than IAEA Director General Yukiya
Amano, presented an opportunity for the Philippines to reflect on this cooperation
and to look forward to the impact of wider and broader application of nuclear
science and technology in our country’s quest for sustainable growth.
On achieving zero hunger, the collaborative research work of Filipino scientists
on radiation applications in agriculture resulted in the successful development of
a plant growth promoter (PGP) through the irradiation of carrageenan, a natural
polymer from seaweed. The use of the PGP has led to significant improvement
1

December 2015
Page 1 of 4

in the yield and health of crops such as rice, rnungbean, and peanut. During field
testing, PGPs were proven capable of increasing the yield of rice by up to 65%
and making the crops more resilient, whether against strong typhoons or the
2 infestation. Experiments also showed an increase of up to ten
ravages of tungro
times the yield for normal practices in mungbean, and up to twice the average
yield for peanut. In the future, we expect this product to be made available in
large volumes to rice farmers and to the private sector.
3
On clean water and sanitation, the Philippines was one of three pioneer
countries in the IAEA Water Availability Enhancement or IWAVE project.
Thanks to funding assistance from the IAEA, the Government adopted the
integration of isotope techniques in the national groundwater assessment
program.
On clean and affordable energy, the Philippines, in collaboration with the IAEA
and the International Framework for Nuclear Energy Cooperation which co
sponsored the Conference, hosted the Regional conference on Prospects of
Nuclear Energy in the Asia-Pacific Region last year. The Conference drew over
a hundred participants from 1 5 countries and re-ignited public discussions on a
nuclear power programme as a long term option in our pursuit of affordable and
clean energy. In August this year, the Philippines will host the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue conference Towards Eneigy Security, Susta inability and Resiliency
which will tackle, among others, the emerging rule of nuclear energy. Through
close cooperation with the IAEA, we expect to formulate the national position on
a nuclear power programme within the year.
On the environment, the Philippines, in collaboration with local and
international partners, has used nuclear analytical techniques for air pollution
studies in Metro Manila, Air pollution caused by particulates in the atmosphere
is of great concern globally, as well as in the Philippines, Black carbon, which
forms much of the fine air particulate pollutants in Metro Manila, and lead
particulates are serious threats to public health. Continuous air pollution
monitoring, through the application of nuclear analytical techniques, have
generated basic data for improved air quality management. Three new monitoring
stations are expected to be established in Taguig, Makati and Valenzuela,
1 am also pleased to share that the Philippines has been re-designated as an JAEA
Collaborating Center for Harmful Algal Bloom “HAB.) Studies for the period
2016- 2020. The Philippines is ready host trainees from other IAEA member
states on receptor binding assay (RBA), which measures the toxin that causes
paralytic shellfish poisoning.
2

Tungro is one of the most destructive virus diseases of rice.

Source
Page 2 of 4

Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines recognizes the importance of strengthening the global nuclear
safety regime and takes this opportunity to acknowledge the role of the IAEA in
enhancing the global nuclear safety framework, and, in promoting nuclear safety
worldwide.
In cooperation with the IAEA, the Philippines is establishing a real time
nationwide environmental radiation monitoring network to enhance our
capability to cope with nuclear or radiological emergencies. We look forward to
the IAEA’s initiatives to strengthen emergency preparedness and response (EPR),
including the implementation of the active exercise program to test EPR at the
international and national levels. We welcome progress in the development of
effective public communication strategies in EPR.
Further, this delegation is optimistic that the draft legislative bill
“Comprehensive Nuclear and Radiation Safety Regulation Act”
currently
categorized as a priority bill of the Department of Science and Technology, will
be passed by the 17th Philippine Congress. The bill would ensure the effective
separation of functions between a regulatory body and the body concerned with
the promotion and utilization of nuclear energy.
-

,

As the current chair of ASEAN, the Philippines notes that there are opportunities
for further strengthening and enhancing safety architecture in our part of the
world. Recognizing the importance of regional cooperation in regulatory control,
the Philippines supports the ASEAN Regulatory Network, the ASEANTOM, and
will take concrete steps to enhance cooperation between the ASEANTOM and
the IAEA in pursuit of the network’s goals and objectives.
Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines notes that the overall objective of a State’s nuclear security
regime is the protection of persons, property, society, and the environment from
malicious acts involving nuclear and other radioactive material, The Philippines
recognizes the critical importance of nuclear security and considers it as an
‘enabler” rather than a constraint in the utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes.
In this context, we reiterate our commitment to the principles laid out in the Joint
tt
Communiqué of the 4
Nuclear Security Summit and to the Ministerial
Declaration in the recent International Conference on Nuclear Security
.
4

December 5-9, 2016
Page 3of4

The Philippines is of the view that the recent Nuclear Security Conference
enabled states to formulate and exchange views on future directions and priorities
fir nuclear security and how these may evolve. We look forward to how inputs
from the Conference could inform the concrete programmes in the IAEA Nuclear
Security Plan 2018-2021.

During the Conference, this delegation shared its national experiences and
achievements in strengthening nuclear security and underscored the importance
of international cooperation, with the IAEA playing a key role. In partnership
with the IAEA and some Member States, the Philippines has installed security
alarm systems for facilities with high-risk radioactive sources and disposed of
vulnerable or disused sources and repatriated these to their origin. We have also
developed a national strategy for the detection of illicit trafficking in nuclear and
radioactive materials at border, installed twenty (20) Radiation Portal Monitors
(RPMs) at ports in Manila and Cebu, and successfully interdicted contaminated
finished products from import shipment. We continue to participate in the IAEA
Illicit Trafficking Database and report any loss, theft, and incident related to illicit
nuclear and radioactive materials. In addition, the Philippines has been supporting
the State Level Safeguards Approach since the IAEA has drawn broader
conclusion for the Philippines in 2013 as published in the Safeguards
Implementation Report. Safeguards Agreement compliant verification activities
carried out at the Philippine Research Reactor (PRR- I) and National Location
Outside Facilities indicate that the Philippines does not have undeclared presence,
production, or processing of nuclear material.
Mr. Chairman,
As a founding member of the United Nations, an active member of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Interpol and the Global Initiative
for Combalting Nuclear Terrorism (GCINT), the Philippines believes in a holistic
approach in dealing with the nuclear security issue. Addressing the threat of
nuclear terrorism and proliferation will also assist in creating the conditions for a
world without nuclear weapons, in accordance with the objectives of the NPT.
N uclear Disarmament, non-proliferation, nuclear security and safety should,
therefore, go hand-in-hand,
In closing, the Philippines expresses its continued support to the IAEA, under the
leadership of DG Yukiya Amano, and joins other States here in recognizing the
Agency’s significant role in promoting Atoms for Peace and Development, and
its unparalleled role in enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to global
peace, health and prosperity.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Page 4 of 4

