Please Check Against Delivery

PHILIPPINES
STATEMENT
To be delivered by Amb. Maria Teresa T. Almojuela
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Philippine
Mission to the UN and Other International Organisations in Geneva
Cluster 3 Issues
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
23 April - 4 May 2018, Geneva

The Philippines aligns itself with the NAM statement delivered by __
to deliver the following remarks in our national capacity.

and wishes

This year, the Philippines celebrates the 60th year of its membership in the IAEA
and 60 years of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
for the realization of the inaljenable right of all parties to the Treaty to research,
production, and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The opening salvo for this celebration was the visit of IAEA Director General
Yukiya Amano to Manila. The diversity of stakeholders met by DG Amano reflects
the importance attached by the Philippines to the future of nuclear science and
technology in the country.
Last year, at the sidelines of the first IAEA International Conference on Technical
Cooperation, the Philippines signed its Country Programme Framework (CPF)
which identifies six priority areas where nuclear technology transfer and
resources will be directed to support our development goals.
On nuclear energy, the IAEA provided technical assistance to the recentlyestablishe·d Nuclear Energy Programme Implementing Organization (NEPIO),
which is refining the national position on nuclear power. We look forward to further
cooperation with the IAEA, as well as other Member States, in this regard.
On food and agriculture, scientists at the Philippine Nuclear Research Institute
(PNRI) have developed, and continue to test and evaluate, a radiation-processed
MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEY A
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva , Switzerland eTel: (+41) (0) 22 716 1930 •E-mail: mission @genevapm .ph

Please Check Against Delivery

carrageenan
productivity.

plant

growth

promoter

that

has · significantly

increased

rice

We are enabling the private ,sector to install irradiation facilities that will expand
shelf life , promote cigricultural exports, and increase r~al incomes of our farmers.
On natural resources and environment, we have utilized nuclear and isotope
analytical techniques for the management of groundwater resources as well as for
air and water pollution studies. We also established more real-time environmental
radiation monitoring stations.
In the coming years, we will explore the application of such techniques to mitigate
the impact of flood and natural calamities in regions which have historically
suffered from flooding.
On industry, with the upgrade of our Cobalt-60 multipurpose irradiation facility,
we have seen a 21 % increase in clients availing of gamma irradiation facilities and
increased . acceptance of radiation technology which could result in the
establishment of commercial facilities in the future.
On human health and medicine, we have improved methods for Sterile Insect
Technique against the dengue mosquito (Aedes aegypti) to complement other
methods for the effective control of dengue and chikungunya. ·
The Philippines looks forward to the first ever IAEA Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Science and Technology in November and expects concrete outcomes
from this Conference.
We anticipate that the Conference will affirm the central role of the IAEA in
enhancing nuclear applications in Member States, the importance of regional
collaboration, and the need to strengthen the Technical Cooperation Programme,
including through sufficient, assured, and predictable resources.

Mr. Chair,
.

.

The Philippines recognizes that the ·primary responsibility for nuclear safety rests
with individual states and the central role of the IAEA in coordinating international
efforts to strengthen nuclear safety globally.
In coordination with the IAEA, we are improving our national nuclear legal and
regulatory framework. Last year, relevant · committees at the House of
Representatives approved the draft Comprehensive Nuclear Law, which will
create an independent regulatory body for all activities and facilities involving
sources of ionizing radiation, and establish a civil nuclear liability regime.
MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEY A
47 Avenue Blanc , 1202 Geneva, Switzerland eTel: (+41) (0) 22 716 1930 eE-mail: mission @genevapm .ph

Please Check Against Delivery

Mr. Chair,
The Philippines recognizes the critical importance of nuclear security .and
considers it as an "enabler" rather than a constraint in the utilization of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. In this context, we reiterate our commitment to the
principles laid out in the Joint Communique of the 4th Nuclear Security Summit
and to the Ministerial Declaration in the International Conference on Nuclear
Security in 2016.
Last year, as Chair of the ASEAN, the Philippines hosted the 4th Meeting of
ASEANTOM (ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy) with a
Technical Session on Nuclear Security in Manila1. The session discussed the
current status of nuclear security • in each ASEAN country, the role of the various
networks, strengthening of partnerships with other countries, and future IAEAsupported projects on the security of radioactive sources throughout the ASEAN
region.
Mr. Chair,
The Philippines believes in a holistic approach in dealing with the nuclear security
issue. Addressing the threat of nuclear terrorism and proliferation will also assist in
creating the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons, in accordance with
the objectives of the NPT. Disarmament, non-proliferation, nuclear security and
sa_fety should, therefore, go hand-in-hand.
In closing, the Philippines acknowledges the indispensable role of the IAEA
particularly under DG Amano in accelerating and enlarging the contribution of
atomic energy to peace, health, and prosperity throughout the world and the
achievement of the SDG agenda. The Philippines reiterates its commitment to
support measures to ensure the protection of the inalienable rights of all States
parties to the Treaty to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without discrimination.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

1December

2017

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEY A
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland eTel: (+41) (0)22 716 1930 •E-mail: mission@genevapm.ph

