Statement
Republic of Poland
Cluster Ill Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
—

Mr. Chairman,

Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
I would also like to draw attention to working documents issued by the EU and the
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative that are relevant to the subject of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Poland respects the inalienable right of States Partied to benefit from the peaceful
uses of the atom. This prerogative is enshrined in the Article IV of the NPT Treaty
and has to be exercised in conformity with non-proliferation commitments.
In 2014 Poland fully aware of its obligations adopted nuclear power programme
which envisages construction of two nuclear power plants Main goals of the
Programme are threefold: to diversify electricity generation structure; to ensure
security of energy supply; and to reduce impact of energy sector on environment.
The Polish nuclear power programme is currently under review and the Ministry of
Energy is planning to present a new structure and schedule of the Programme by
the end of this year. At this early stage we pledge full transparency with regard to
future activities in the domain of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Poland is committed to preserving the highest standards of nuclear security in the
development of the nuclear power programme as well as in other peaceful
dpplications of nuclear energy. The political pledge in that area was emphasized
inter alia by our participation in the Nuclear Security Summits process since 2010.
We welcome the fact that momentum generated by summits consolidated like
minded countries who have been working together to strengthen nuclear security.
Since nuclear security primarily remains the responsibility of States we believe that
strong commitment to strengthening it nationally is of utmost importance.
Therefore Poland has been working hard to make sure its existing and future
nudear facilities meet appropriate international standards, For example in 2016 we

hosted the Follow-up Mission of the Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review as
well as the International Physical Protection Advisory Service Mission.
I would also like to highlight our the most spectacular achievement in the field of
nuclear security that could not be possible without international cooperation. In
September 2016 under the framework the Global Threat Reduction Initiative the
last part of High-enriched Uranium contained in spent nuclear fuel that was used in
our research reactor was successfully removed from the Polish territory. Poland
joined countries that use only Low-enriched Uranium (LEU) as a fuel for Its research
reactor. This achievement notably contributed to improving the nuclear security In
Poland and In the region. We will continue to support efforts in order to minimize
use of High-enriched Uranium in civilian applications.
Mr Chairman,
Poland recognizes and appreciates the central role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency as the organization that encourages responsible development of
peaceful applications of nuclear technology. Technical cooperation programmes
offered mostly in the framework of the IAEA activities contribute directly to
strengthening of nuclear safety and security, promoting sustainable energy and
applications of nuclear energy in health, Industrial and other fields.
The Agency underpins the global nuclear security architecture. The iAEA ministerial
conferences on nuclear security became an important element of the nuciear
security landscape. We believe they offer unique opportunity to combine political
guidance to the IAEA with possibility for experts to exchange views end information
on practical side of the subject. Poland strongly encourages the IAEA to continue
with this useful approach and we will be supporting Agency in this endeavor. We
reiterate the need of ensuring that the IAEA has adequate technical, financial and
human resources to effectively address nuclear security.
Mr. Chairman,
The Nfl Treaty provides a solid framework for promoting confidence and
cooperation In the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. For many States Parties this
area is of utmost importance due to challenges they face at home be energy
shortages, the need to reduce the C02 footprint or diversification of energy sources.
Poland expects that the new review cycle of the Treaty will pay sufficient attention
to issues discussed under cluster Ill and lead to adoption of consensus
recommendations at the 2020 RevCon.

2

