Mr. Chairman,
Poland wishes to present, in its national capacity, a couple of specific issues regarding peaceful applications of atomic energy.
Mr. Chairman,
According to the Article IV of the NPT, implementation of the Treaty cannot affect "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty". Therefore, the International Atomic Energy Agency, verifying the fulfilment of each State Party to the Treaty by its safeguards system, at the same time as its central objective treats all efforts to "accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world." Nowadays, in various parts of the world, nuclear and isotopic techniques for application in food and agriculture, human health, water resources and in environmental protection can play valuable, sometimes unique, roles in meeting the human basic needs. Technical co-operation programme of the International Atomic Energy Agency has always been an integral component of the mandate of the Agency under its Statute, representing one of the principal mechanisms for fulfilling the Agency's "Atom for Peace" mission.
Poland, not being currently a nuclear power state, develops very widely various applications of nuclear techniques in industry, human health, environmental protection and agriculture. Poland also strongly supports all the activities aimed at strengthening the international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of atomic energy, playing in that process a role of an active participant - as a donor and a recipient country - in different international projects, some of them in the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency's technical cooperation programme. During the years that programme has established itself as a well functioning mechanism for the transfer of technology to Agency's Member States, being at the same time an important element in the sustainable development process. Being aware of enormous needs existing in the world in that area, we find justified and indispensable any cost-sharing or Partnership in Development concepts, able to assist - above all financially - in effective and efficient implementing of nuclear technologies and techniques in various fields.
Mr. Chairman,
Poland considers vital a role played by the IAEA in the promotion of nuclear safety worldwide, strengthening a global nuclear safety culture. Over years the Agency has developed legally binding international conventions as well as internationally accepted safety standards with regard to nuclear safety and radiation protection; it has also elaborated measures to assist States in the implementation of these conventions and standards. Without those international legal instruments it should not be possible to develop and strengthen the cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Poland is a party to all the multilateral legal instruments created under the auspices of the IAEA: the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, the Convention on Assistance in the case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials (recently amended with the active Polish contributionsupporting the amending process being presently under final phase of preparation) and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel
Management and the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, always actively participating in their Review Conferences.
Poland also strongly supports the initiatives which have been born on the side of the IAEA capacity, but in our opinion contribute to the nuclear security as a such as well as strengthen the non-proliferation system. 1 am thinking here about the Global Threat Reduction Initiative (GTRI), in which Poland decided to participate in 2005. Having established proper measures of co-operation with the US and the IAEA, Poland took then a decision - within a framework of the GTRI - to carry out the conversion of the core of our MARIA research reactor near Warsaw from HEU to LEU fuel. The process o! c onsultations both with the American partners and the IAEA was successfully concluded on January 16, 2007, by a signature of all Parties to the Project and Supply Agreement, which was followed by publishing of this document in the IAEA official documents (INFCIRC/695). The Agreement is now being implemented.
Poland also welcomes many other related initiatives including inter alia the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GITCNT) announced in 2006 . Poland is on the eve of supporting the Statement of Principl les of the GITCNT and therefore taking part in the next GITCNT meeting in Kazakhstan in June.
Mr. Chairman,
While discussing the peaceful uses of atomic energy development, we cannot forget that recent trends in the world science have shown the necessity of better management of nuclear knowledge. Poland shares the concern about implications of a potential loss of knowledge, caused by ageing of the nuclear workforce as well as the decreasing support for university programmes in nuclear science and engineering. This phenomenon is - unfortunately - more drastically observed in countries like Poland, with no nuclear power programme
under implementation, but with such a programme being foreseen for the near future. On the other hand, without proper education, research and development of nuclear science at the national level, it is impossible to sustain a sufficient level of nuclear safety and security in any country in the world. Therefore, we fully support all the activities aimed at the development of nuclear education and at the preservation of nuclear knowledge.
To conclude, Mr. Chairman, 1 would like to ensure you that Poland strongly supports international initiatives focussed at both strengthening the development of peaceful uses of atomic energy and enhancing the transfer as well as the safe and secure application of nuclear technologies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.