The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

Cluster III (Peaceful uses)
Mr. Chairman,
In light of the critical role nuclear energy played in its own development, the
Republic of Korea is a strong advocate of the inalienable right of all parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to use nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes. The Treaty’s grand bargain that balanced the need to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons with the commitment to the fullest
possible exchange of nuclear equipment, materials and know-how has resulted in
the benefits of nuclear energy reaching millions of people across the globe.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has a unique role in this
regard. On the one hand, it prevents the spread of nuclear weapons through the
implementation of safeguards. On the other, its technical cooperation program is
the main mechanism for transferring nuclear technology to Member States. The
IAEA’s assistance to its Member States develop and strengthen capacities for the
safe, peaceful and secure use of nuclear technology has contributed significantly to
sustainable socioeconomic development. In fact, nuclear and isotopic techniques
contribute directly to attaining over half of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Republic of Korea remains a committed support of the IAEA and its
mandate of atoms for peace and development. We have demonstrated this
commitment in a variety of ways, including by sharing our experience and
capabilities with other countries, contributing to the Technical Cooperation Fund
(TCF) and engaging in discussions for enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency
of the TC program and ensuring that TCF resources are sufficient, assured, and
predictable.
In this connection, I would like to recall our support of the Peaceful Uses
Initiative (PUI), which has become a very meaningful instrument for implementing
1

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

Article IV. Since it was launched within the NPT context in 2010, the PUI has
mobilized 100 million euros that benefitted over 150 Member States. In addition to
mobilizing extrabudgetary contributions to supplement the TCF, the PUI enables
the IAEA to react quickly to emerging threats and challenges, including the recent
Ebola and Zika outbreaks. Since 2011, the Republic of Korea has contributed an
estimated USD 6 million to the PUI in support of a wide variety of projects. We
invite all States in a position to do so to join us in promoting “Atoms for Peace and
Development” and contribute to this Initiative.
Mr. Chairman,
Ensuring appropriate and effective levels of nuclear safety and security is the
responsibility of each state exercising its right to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. As a forum for cooperation and coordination, the IAEA provides essential
support to Member States in their efforts to build a strong and sustainable global
framework to prevent unsafe acts and security breaches.
[Nuclear safety]
IAEA Safety Standards have helped many Member States establish and
improve national regulatory requirements and guidelines. The Republic of Korea
commends the IAEA for its open and transparent efforts to develop and revise the
safety standards and will remain an active participant in that work through the
Commission on Safety Standards and the Safety Standards Committees. Believing
that application of internationally harmonized safety standards to national
regulatory frameworks contributes to more effective global nuclear safety, the
Republic of Korea encourages all Member States to make full use of the safety
standards at the national level.
With regard to international cooperation in the field of nuclear safety, I
would like to note the work of the International Nuclear Regulators Association
(INRA). The INRA was established to enhance nuclear safety by providing a
2

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

forum for regulators to exchange information and good practices on issues like
regulatory independence, the development of a global nuclear safety culture and
international cooperation. The Republic of Korea has participated since 2006 and
is honored to serve as INRA chair in 2018. With the next meeting scheduled for
the second half of this year, the Republic of Korea will do its best to ensure the
meeting’s success.
The Sixth Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties of the Joint
Convention takes place next month. The Republic of Korea attaches great
importance to role of the Joint Convention in enhancing the level of safety in
radioactive waste and spent fuel management worldwide and is looking forward to
full and substantive participation in the review process.
[Nuclear security]
Mr. Chairman,
Effective and comprehensive nuclear security of nuclear and other
radioactive material is not an obstacle to but a facilitator of peaceful nuclear
activities. If we fail to have an appropriate nuclear security measure and face a
nuclear terrorist incident, public opinion will turn against peaceful use of nuclear
energy and technology. The Republic of Korea welcomes taking appropriate
nuclear security considerations into account when planning and implementing
technical cooperation projects.
Member States have consistently recognized the IAEA’s central role in
strengthening the nuclear security framework globally and in coordinating
international cooperation. In keeping with this role, the Republic of Korea believes
that resourcing for the implementation of the IAEA’s nuclear security activities
should be sufficient, sustainable and reliable. To this end we have contributed USD
7.1 million to the Nuclear Security Fund and invite other Member States to
consider supporting the Agency’s activities in this field as well.
3

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

Mr. Chairman,
While good progress has been made, the international community must
remain vigilant against emerging and evolving threats and continue to strengthen
nuclear security. Korea welcomes in this regard the approval of the Nuclear
Security Plan 2018–2021 and appreciates the IAEA’s commitment to addressing
emerging nuclear security issues identified by the Member States, such as cyber
threats.
With our experience chairing 2012 Nuclear Security Summit and 2016
IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security, as well as participating in the
Nuclear Security Contact Group, the Republic of Korea has been an active
contributor to global nuclear security efforts. We will continue to participate
actively in the preparatory processes of the 2019 IAEA Ministerial Conference and
the 2021 Amended CPPNM Review Conference. We would also like to ask states
that have yet to become a party to the ICSANT and the CPPNM and its
amendment to do so as early as possible.
In the meantime, Korea is working to strengthen implementation of
INFCIRC/904, the Joint Statement on Supporting Nuclear and Radiological
Terrorism Preparedness and Response Capabilities, which was circulated in
December 2016. Taking this opportunity, we would also like to renew the
invitation to IAEA Member States to subscribe to the Joint Statement.
With these remarks, my delegation would like to conclude by reiterating its
support of your efforts to guide our deliberations here in Geneva to a successful
conclusion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. /END/
4

