Statement by Ambassador AHN Young-jip
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations in Geneva
The Third Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
(Cluster III Issues)
5 May 2014
New York

<Check against Delivery>

Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

The Republic of Korea fully supports, as other delegation already commented, the inalienable right
of all NPT parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
However, the exercise of these rights entails compliance with the obligations under the Treaty
outlined in Articles I, II and III. My delegation firmly believes that the full confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful nature of a State’s nuclear program is vital in
realizing the benefits of peaceful uses and applications. In accordance with this principle, it is our
firm belief that realizing the full potential of nuclear energy is of great importance in the promotion
of peace and prosperity for all humankind.

Having witnessed firsthand the benefits of nuclear energy in its socio-economic development, the
Republic of Korea is committed to sharing our experience and capabilities with countries in need, in
particular with developing countries and newcomer countries in the field of nuclear development.

In this regard, the Republic of Korea remains a strong supporter of the IAEA technical cooperation
(TC) program, the main mechanism for capacity-building of Member States. The Republic of Korea,
as a net contributor to the Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF), will continue to support the Agency’s
essential activities in assisting developing countries. We will also continue to actively engage in
discussions on enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of the program.

Furthermore, the Republic of Korea has participated in the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) pursued by
the United States, aiming to expand support for the IAEA’s mission to provide developing countries
with greater access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Through the Initiative, the Republic of

Korea has contributed over USD 4 million to projects related to developing nuclear power
infrastructure, building capability, mitigating climate change, and developing cancer treatment and
other diagnostic activities.
Mr. Chairman,

The Republic of Korea strongly believes that the right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy must be
accompanied by commitments to and ongoing implementation of safeguards as well as appropriate
and effective levels of safety and security.

Nuclear Safety

On nuclear safety, the Republic of Korea is pleased with the ongoing discussions within the
international community to capture the experience and lessons learned from the 2011 Fukushima
Daiichi accident. To name a few, participants at the Sixth Review Conference of the Nuclear Safety
Convention, which took place in Vienna this year, reviewed and identified a number of areas for
further improvement—such as harmonizing emergency plans and response measures, strengthening
regulatory independence, and promoting safety culture, transparency and openness. The Republic of
Korea will continue to work closely with other Contracting Parties to address all of the issues raised
during the review meeting.

In addition, the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety (GOV/2011/59-GC(55)/14) continues to
provide valuable guidance and motivation for the strengthening of the global nuclear safety
framework. The Republic of Korea believes that the implementation of all agreed measures is vitally
important and calls for continued work in those areas identified by the Implementation Report.

My government also looks forward to the finalization of the Comprehensive Report on the
Fukushima accident. We anticipate that the report will bring together insights and lessons learned in
all phases of the accident in order to provide an authoritative, factual and balanced direction to
strengthen nuclear safety worldwide.

Mr. Chairman,

Mindful of the efforts of the international community to enhance nuclear safety, the Republic of
Korea is determined to assume its due share of the responsibility. In doing so, special priority has
been given to assessing their safety under severe conditions and to maximizing the benefits of the
IAEA’s peer review services. We have conducted a comprehensive assessment of the safety and
emergency preparedness of the 23 nuclear power plants in operation in the ROK. We are currently
working on implementing all the safety improvement items identified by 2015. In addition, The
Republic of Korea hosted an IAEA Integrated Regulatory Review Service (IRRS) mission with a
view to enhancing the effectiveness and independence of regulatory bodies, and a follow-up mission
to the IRRS is planned for later this year.

Nuclear Security

Mr. Chairman,

Regarding nuclear security, the Republic of Korea welcomes a series of achievements made through
the Nuclear Security Summit process, which began in Washington D.C. in 2010 and continued in
Seoul in 2012 and The Hague in 2014. Since the start of the summit process, as many as 200
commitments have been made and implemented, which have also contributed to the implementation
of the Action Plan of 2010 NPT Review Conference.

Building on this progress, President Park Geun-hye made a four point proposal at the Hague Summit.
The proposal includes (1) requiring a holistic approach that promotes synergy among nuclear
security, disarmament and non-proliferation; (2) pursuing a regional mechanism; (3) narrowing the
capacity gap among states; and (4) taking steps to tackle the emerging threat of cyber terrorism
against nuclear facilities. President Park also reaffirmed the Republic of Korea’s commitment to
strengthened nuclear security and shared some of the actions taken in this regard, which include
hosting the International Physical Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS) mission, launching the
International Nuclear Nonproliferation and Security Academy and sharing our best practices on
tracking radioactive sources on a real-time basis with Vietnam.

The Republic of Korea notes with satisfaction the work done by the IAEA over the past years,
including the 2013 IAEA International Conference on Nuclear security, and acknowledges its central
role in enhancing global nuclear security.

Mr. Chairman,

As a concluding remark, the ROK delegation would like to highlight three areas where more work is
needed to promote the long-term sustainable development of nuclear energy. First and foremost, the
right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy must be exercised in conjunction with appropriate and
effective levels of safety and security.

Second, assurance of supply is another area which can serve to promote peaceful uses of nuclear
energy by ensuring access to nuclear fuel. In this regard, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
progress made in establishing an IAEA LEU fuel bank, and we further stress the need to revitalize
the discussions on the development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle.

Third, the management of spent fuel is a growing challenge for all nuclear power countries. With 23
reactors in operation, the Republic of Korea is also facing a serious challenge of waste management.
We believe that international collaboration is much needed in this area, and therefore we stand ready
to share our experience and knowledge with other countries.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. /END /

