The Second Preparatory Committee fo,' the 2015 Review Conf'el'ellce of the
Parties to the T,'ellty on the NOIl-Prolife!'lltion of Nil clear Well)lons
April 2013, Gencva

Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
(Cluster III)
Mr. Chairman,

Since 1970, NPT has helped its States parties ensure the right to the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes with the obligation to refrain from manufacturing or otherwise acquiring
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. This compact has opened the way for
nuclear power and other peaceful uses of nuclear energy to make a profound impact on
socioeconomic development around the globe,

With nuclear energy having played a crucial role in Korea's development, the Korean
government continues to attach great importance to realizing the full potential of nuclear energy
to advance peace and prosperity for all humankind, We take seriously our obligation to
cooperate in contributing to the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, particularly in developing countries.

We appreciate that, with its unique mandate "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world," IAEA assumes an
essential role as facilitator of international cooperation. With 2015 marking not only the next
NPT Review Conference but also the target year for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, IAEA's efforts to build human and institutional capacity to safely utilize
nuclear technologies in order to address local needs and global issues deserve our full support,

The Second Preparatory Committee for the 20IS Review Conference oftne
Parties to the Treaty on the NOll-Proliferatioll of Nuclear Weapons
April 2013, Geneva

As we well know, IAEA's technical cooperation (TC) program is the primary mechanism for
delivering capacity-building services to its Member States and contributing to the objectives of
Article IV of the NPT. Thus, 2010 Review Conference called upon States parties to make every
effort and take practical steps to ensure that IAEA resources for technical cooperation activities
are sufficient, assured and predictable. Recalling the goal to raise USD 100 million as
extrabudgetary contributions to IAEA activities between 2010 and 2015 under 'Peaceful Use
Initiative', we invite all States in a position to do so to contribute to this important tool for
promoting both peace and development.

The Republic of Korea remains a strong supporter of the TC program in keeping with the
Actions on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the Final Document of the 2010 Review
Conference.

In 2012, Korea made USD 2.8 million available to support the transfer of nuclear

technology for peaceful purposes to developing countries in need through various vehicles
under the 'Peaceful Use Initiative'. As an advanced nuclear power country, we have also taken
steps to share our experience and know-how with our partner countries in order to help ensure
the successful launching of their nuclear power programs.

Particularly at a time when many States have to consider austerity measures, improving the
overall quality and relevance of the TC program will remain a key factor in our efforts to ensure
that the peaceful and safe use of nuclear applications will be available to those who desire them.
We therefore underline our support for the ongoing efforts to enhance the effectiveness and
efficiency ofIAEA's technical cooperation program.

The Second Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Trenty on the NOll-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapolls
April 2013, Geneva

Mr. Chairman,

Inherent in the promise of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is the responsibility to make
certain that it remains a force for good in the world. As confirmed by the Conference in 2010,
this responsibility entails commitments to and ongoing implementation of safeguards as well as
appropriate and effective levels of safety and security. While the full confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful nature of a State's nuclear program as
established by IAEA through application of comprehensive safeguards is vital, it is equally
important that all nuclear programs be operated in accordance with the highest levels of safety
and security. Here too IAEA plays a central role in developing, disseminating and promoting
the global acceptance and use of its safety standards and security guidelines.

Our goal should be to develop stable and sustainable global safety, security and nonproliferation
regimes that duly take into account the inalienable right to peaceful uses. This is easier said than
done, but we believe that this opportunity to review our commitments to the objectives of
Article IV in conformity with the obligations outlined in Articles I, II and III is a step in the
right direction, given the real world risks that threaten the sustainable development of nuclear
energy.

The 2011 Fukushima Daiichi accident is perhaps the most dramatic reminder in recent years
that the peaceful use of nuclear energy has global consequences. While each State has an
individual responsibility, robust international cooperation is essential if we and our future
generations are to continue to benefit from nuclear energy. In this regard, noting the progress
made in the implementation of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, we urge all States

/,

I,

The Second Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
'Parties to the Treaty on the NOll-Proliferation of Nucicar Weapolls
April 2013, Geneva

parties to fully implement the agreed measures in a timely manner with a view to strengthening
nuclear safety worldwide.

We take note that the factors that contributed to growing interest in nuclear power before the
Fukushima Daiichi accident have not changed. The projected expansion of nuclear power may
have slowed, but the trend does not appear to have been reversed. In any case, demands on all
stages of the fuel cycle will follow suit. Korea believes that multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle would help achieve NPT objectives and promote peaceful uses of nuclear
energy by providing back-up access to nuclear fuel. Supporting the progress made in
multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle so far, we further stress the need to discuss the
development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the back-end of the
fuel cycle.

The management of spent fuel remains an unresolved challenge. Globally, total cumulative
amount of spent fuel increases by thousands of tons per year. Like all nuclear nations, Korea is
seriously facing a growing waste management problem. We are thus ready to share our
experience and knowledge with other countries with a view to stimulating international
collaboration in developing safe, economic, and timely solutions to high-level waste disposal
and ensuring the continued viability of nuclear power.

Thank you for your attention.

IENDI

