The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, First Session
2-12 May 2017, Vienna

Cluster III (Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, Withdrawal)
<Check against Delivery>
Mr. Chairman,

The Republic of Korea fully appreciates that all Parties to the NPT enjoy the
inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy and views the third pillar of the
Treaty as an area around which we can form a wider consensus and build a positive
momentum to move our discussion forward. We believe doing so would lay a good
foundation for us to achieve a constructive and fruitful outcome at the 2020 NPT
Review Conference. With this in mind, I would like to touch upon a few issues of
importance to us.

First, given the sensitive nature of nuclear energy, full confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful nature of a State’s nuclear
program is vital. Thus, the exercise of the right of peaceful uses should entail
compliance with the nonproliferation and safeguards obligations and we strongly
support the role of the IAEA as a guardian of nonproliferation.

Second, as a country where nuclear energy has played a crucial role in
development, the Republic of Korea attaches great importance to international
cooperation [for safe, secure, and peaceful uses of nuclear energy]. We strongly
endorse the IAEA Technical Cooperation (TC) program as a core mechanism in
providing developing countries greater access to peaceful uses and applications of
nuclear energy.
-1-

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, First Session
2-12 May 2017, Vienna

We support the efforts, called for by the 2010 Action Plan, to ensure that the TC
program has sufficient, assured, and predictable resources, and we will keep
engaging in the ongoing discussion on enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency
of the program. The Republic of Korea will continue with its contributions to this
program and the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) and, as the host of the Regional
Office of the Regional Cooperation Agreement (RCA), will continue to take an
active part in providing capacity-building resources, training, and technical support
to developing countries in Asia and the Pacific.

Third, as we reaffirmed at the Review Conference in 2010, the right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy must be exercised in conjunction with appropriate and
effective levels of safety and security. Nuclear safety is particularly crucial in
guaranteeing sustainable development and increasing public receptiveness to
nuclear energy. The Republic of Korea is faithfully implementing key instruments
on nuclear safety, such as the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS) and the Vienna
Declaration through the domestic legislative and regulatory framework established
last year. And just a little over a month ago, Korea received positive peer reviews
at the 7th Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the CNS. We have
continued our efforts to engage with neighboring countries with a view to further
strengthening regional cooperation for nuclear safety and emergency preparedness
in Northeast Asia. While safety remains a national responsibility, progress
achieved in this area is a testament to the effectiveness of our international
cooperation. We commend the IAEA in leading the efforts to raise awareness on
the issue, drawing on the lessons learned from the major accident in 2011 and
coming up with concrete measures to enhance nuclear safety worldwide.
-2-

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, First Session
2-12 May 2017, Vienna

As for nuclear security, last year marked an important juncture in garnering
wider international support: we welcome the entry into force of the Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM/A) last
year and look forward to the effective implementation and universalization of this
key instrument. We urge all States to join the Amendment to the CPPNM
(CPPNM/A) to strengthen a norms-based nuclear security architecture. While
responsibility for nuclear security, as with nuclear safety, rests with each State,
international cooperation is vital. The Republic of Korea notes with satisfaction
many achievements of various international organizations and initiatives, such as
the UN, INTERPOL, the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT),
and the Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction (GP). As the host of the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit (NSS), Korea
also welcomes the tangible results and political commitment generated through the
NSS process.

We also stress the IAEA’s central role in facilitating and coordinating
international cooperation for nuclear security. We attach particular significance to
strengthening cyber security, as shown in our contribution of 6.3 million U.S.
dollars to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund.

Fourth, we believe that the management of spent fuel is the most critical issue
that all countries using nuclear power are currently facing. We support the IAEA’s
development of safety standards on the decommissioning of nuclear facilities and
the Agency’s sharing of best practices with Member States. We encourage all NPT
Parties to give due attention to and expand cooperation on safe and secure
management of the back end of the fuel cycle. Next month, we will be shutting
-3-

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, First Session
2-12 May 2017, Vienna

down our first nuclear power reactor Kori-1 among the 25 reactors we have, after
39 years of its operation. In conducting our very first decommissioning, we are
willing to work together with other States and share our experiences and
technology developed in the process.

Last but not least, addressing the issue of preventing the abuse of withdrawal is
critical in upholding the credibility of the NPT regime. The right to withdraw is a
sovereign right given to Parties to the Treaty. However, if a Party harms the
objectives of the Treaty by abusing its rights, then it seriously undermines the
validity of the NPT, as we have witnessed in the case of North Korea.
Unfortunately, the current NPT regime lacks a proper mechanism to respond to a
State’s withdrawal after violating the Treaty or to address the consequences of the
violations prior to withdrawal. Therefore, we need to keep our discussions on
Article X including the following points to address the potential but grave
consequences of withdrawal by a violator:
- First, a mechanism that enables State Parties to intervene immediately to
review any violations of the state withdrawing from the Treaty should be
developed. Such mechanism may include an emergency meeting to assess
compliance with the NPT and the IAEA Safeguard Agreement.
- Second, withdrawal from the Treaty cannot affect the consequences resulting
from violations prior to withdrawal, and the materials, facilities, and equipment
acquired prior to withdrawal must remain subject to the IAEA Safeguards.
- Third, the withdrawing state must return all facilities and materials acquired
prior to withdrawal.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman. /End/
-4-

