Statement 1w Roniania
at the 2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference

Cluster 111
(Viena, 2 —12 May 2017)

Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished Delegates,
Romania aligns itself with the statement made earlier by the representative of the
European Union, and welcomes this opportunity to reaffirm, in national capacity,
its commitment to promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy, as stipulated in
Article IV of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
Safeguards
Romania fully support the efforts of the AIEA to implement safeguards in the
most effective and efficient way. In order to carry out effectively its verification
function under the NPT, the IAEA needs legal authority, strong verification tools,
cooperation with States and sufficient resources.
We believe that the application of safeguards in the context of the State Level
Concept will allow the AIEA to improve efficiency.

In our view, a

Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement together with the Additional Protocol is
the verification standards for non-nuclear-weapon States party to the NPT.
Romania strongly supports the universal adoption of the Additional Protocol.

Mr. Chairman,
Based on more than 60-year experience and expertise in the nuclear field,
Romania is ready to share its theoretical and practical knowledge in the field of
nuclear safety and security with other IAEA Member States. Our national
institutions offer training and assistance bilaterally or through the IAEA TC
program, which help other Member States build and improve their systems and
personnel.

1

Romania underlines the need of growing transparency and trust between countries
using peaceful nuclear energy in meeting the highest nuclear security, safety and
non-proliferation requirements, in full compliance with all relevant international
agreements, and encourages IAEA Member States to host peer review and follow
up missions in the field of nuclear safety and security. We also urges all States
that have not yet done so, to become party as soon as possible to all international
legal instruments related to safety, security and nonproliferation.
PU’
We welcome and strongly support all the initiatives in those fields, such as the
Peaceful Uses Initiative, the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GCINT).
The IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) is a valuable and flexible mechanism to
mobilize voluntary extra-budgetary resources to help address development needs
of Member States. That is why Romania would like to take this opportunity to
state its support for PUI, and to commend its role in ensuring food security,
advancing human health and protecting the environment.
TC
Romania supports the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme and to the
statutory right of any Member States to be eligible for IC programmes. TC is the
way in which the Agency is promoting the applications of nuclear related
techniques to eradicate poverty and hunger worldwide, hence contributing to the
sustainable development, but it also help Member States with peaceful nuclear
power programmes in capacity building throughout the entire nuclear fuel cycle
and keeping up to the IAEA standards of safety and security.
Rornania has undergoing IC projects in nuclear security and safety, while also
offering regularly in-kind contributions and sharing know-how and best practices.
Air. Chairman,
In conclusion, Romania would like to reassure the international community of its
full support and cooperation in the framework of the continuous efforts to promote
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
IThank

you.

2

