IIocTmlHHoe rrpe,L(CTaBlfTeJIbCTBO
POCCllllCKOll <Pe,L(epaU;llll
rrpll OT,L(eJIemm OOH II ,L(pymx
Me)l(,L(YHapO,L(HbIX opram13au;mIX
B )f{eHeBe

Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations Office and
Other International Organizations
in Geneva

STATEMENT
by Mikhail ULYANOV
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
Director of the Department for Security Affairs and Disarmament
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference ofthe Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Block of issues
III (peaceful use of nuclear energy)
\

Geneva, April 2013

2

Distinguished Mr. Chainnan,
The key factor of the development of any country is its energy security. The
quality of life and the level of the economic development are defined by the level
of electric energy consumption. The analysis of the existing trends of and
challenges to the economic development of the IAEA Member States (growing
global energy demand, environmental concerns, including climate change and the
fluctuating fossil fuel prices) shows that they are impossible to overcome without a
rapid and large-scale development of the nuclear power industry. It is a well-tested
technology, which can be the answer to the multiple challenges of today.
'-

Russia has consistently called for providing wider access to the benefits of

the 'peaceful atom' to the NPT States Parties, for developing international
cooperation in this sphere and observing the necessary balance between the
exploitation of nuclear power for peaceful purposes and strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime in general and the IAEA safeguards system in particular.
The recognition of the States' right to benefit from the peaceful use of
nuclear power was once again acknowledged in the UN Security Council
Resolution 1887 of 24 September 2009, during the UNSC meeting, which took
place in April of2012, as well as in the final documents of Washington and Seoul
nuclear security summits.

Distinguished Mr. Chainnan,
The accident at the Fukushima-Daiichi NPP influenced the public sentiment
in a number of countries towards nuclear energy, however the majority of countries
where with NPPs running or that are planning to construct their first NPPs have
announced their decision to continue putting their plans into action.
The 56 th session of the IAEA General Conference, which took place last
September, showed that the international community had recovered after the
Fukushima accident. According to the 2013 IAEA Nuclear Technologies Review,
as of 31 December 2012 there were 437 nuclear reactors operating with a nominal

3

power of 372.5 GW, which is 3.7 GW more than in 2011. In 2012, 7 new reactors
were still under construction.
According to the IAEA pessimistic assessment, by 2030 the total nominal
power of all the NPPs in the world will reach 456 GW, or 740 GW according to

f
I

the optimistic assessment. All this proves that the development of the civil nuclear 1
energy industry is unavoidable, and ensuring a high level of security of this ' \
industry, including nuclear security and safety, is a prerequisite for its operation.
In 2011, attaching great importance to the safety of nuclear power
installations and strengthening the relative international legal foundation, the
Russian Federation suggested amending the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the

!

Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, as well as strengthening
the IAEA safety standards. We strongly believe that an early adoption of our
proposals will help to significantly reduce the risk of negative consequences of
nuclear accidents in the future.
Nuclear safety should also be enhanced by means of new technological I
solutions. Russia, therefore, believes it is necessary to design NPPs equipped with
both active and passive security systems. It is important that such projects already
exist. I am referring to the so-called 3+ generation NPPs. The Russian designs of

I

NPPs constructed in Russia and abroad include double-shell reactors, passive heat
removal systems, and core melt capture and cooling systems.
In the future, we will need new solutions, which the interested parties should
search for together, with the IAEA playing an active part in the process. Russia
initiated the IAEA Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles
(INPRO) and was its leading co-sponsor; this project is a wonderful example of
such cooperation. The number of countries taking part in the project has reached
39.

Another example of Russia's successful participation

III

international \

cooperation in the sphere of peaceful use of nuclear energy is the International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER). Russia fulfills all its commitments, I

4

including the production of superconductors in full compliance with the ITER high
) standards.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia intends to de,;,elop its atomic energy sector. The necessary legal,
financial and institutional foundation has been created. It would be enough to say
that by 2015 the government is planning to spend approximately 1 trillion rubles
for these purposes. It has set the target of having nuclear energy facilities produce
from 25 to 30 percent of energy in Russia by 2030.
The atomic industry of Russia is focused today on supplying reactors of
different power levels to the market. To be more specific, Russia is constructing
water-cooled water-moderated power reactors (WWERs) with a power of 1200
MW, but also nuclear energy installations with WWERs with a power of 300 and
640 MW. These reactors, capable of not only generating energy to produce
electricity, but at the same time, for example, of desalinating water, can become a
tool used for development in many countries.
Russia is finishing the construction of a reactor on fast neutrons with a
system of sodium cooling BN-800, which will work on a mixture of uranium and
plutonium fuel. BN-600 is a reactor of the same type, and it has been successfully
run in Russia for over 30 years.
Russia has begun the creation of the so-called generation 4 reactors on fast
I

neutrons, where the possibility of having a closed nuclear fuel cycle.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
Large-scale efforts aimed at training personnel constitute an important part
of Russia's program of the development of the nuclear energy sector. Today, the
National Research Nuclear University of Russia (Moscow Engineering and Physics
Institute - MEPhI) not only trains staff for the Russian nuclear energy sector, but is
also ready to train students and experts from the IAEA Member States to prepare
their personnel for programs in the sphere of nuclear energy. For this end, during

5

the 56 th session of the IAEA General Conference, the IAEA and MEPhI signed ('
Practical Arrangements aimed at developing the cooperation in nuclear education.
Moreover, in order to promote joint projects aimed at training experts to
operate the nuclear infrastructure in the countries that have embarked upon the
th

path of developing nuclear energy programs, during the 55 session of the IAEA
General Conference, OJSC "Concern Rosenergoatom", the Central Institute for
Continuing Education and Training (situated in the town of Obninsk) and the
Agency signed Practical Arrangements.
The implementation of the Agreement on the provIsIOn of Junior
Professional Staff training junior staff signed in 2010 with the Agency has become
an important element of the process of training personnel for the Russian nuclear
sector.
Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2,.Article IV of the NPT Russia has
been actively cooperating for years with the NPT States Parties in constructing and
operating NPPs, supplying nuclear fuel, equipment and nuclear materials,
pr9moting nuclear safety, managing irradiated nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes,
training nuclear energy experts.
The

Russian

Federation

has

concluded

government-to-government

agreements on cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear power with over 30
States, as well as a number of agreements on specific areas of cooperation. They
constitute a necessary legal basis for implementing specific bilateral projects.
Russia attaches great importance to developing cooperation in the peaceful
use of nuclear power with the State Members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), in particular Armenia, Kazakhstan, the Republic of
Belarus and Ukraine.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
Russia attaches great importance to the IAEA Technical Cooperation

)'

Program. The Russian Federation makes and will further make volun~
contributions to the Technical Cooperation Fund in full/We stand for preserving

6

the existing mechanism of its replenishment through assessed contributions of the
States Parties in their national currency, the amount of which is determined based
on the UN scale of assessment in accordance with the established practice.
Russia has been actively cooperating for years with the Agency

III

implementing the projects aimed at effective use of applied nuclear technologies in
the areas that are important for the development of economies of the IAEA
Member States.
One of the projects that received wide support is the project on nuclear
medicine that provides for advanced training of medical physicists from the CIS
countries in the area of radiation therapy and radiation oncology. We have been
working together with IAEA on the regional project on training experts in the area
of rehabilitation of the territories that have been affected by uranium production
industries.
The Russian Federation is assisting the developing NPT States Parties in
building accelerators and neutron generators; it supplies ionizing radiation sources,
equipment for neutron radiography, gamma-ray therapy,

liquid nitrogen

production, and other equipment.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right of ail NPT States Parties to devdop research,
production and use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes in accordance with
Article IV of the Treaty provides an opportunity for developing a nuclear fuel
cycle, some elements of which are highly proliferation-sensitive.
It seems that an alternative to proliferation of such technologies all over the

world would be the guaranteed access of the countries without such types of
installations and while fulfilling all obligations in the field of nuclear nonproliferation to nuclear fuel and corresponding nuclear fuel cycle (NFC) services,
including spent nuclear fuel and highly radioactive waste management. This way
would also be economically efficient for the countries with emerging nuclear
power.

7

We believe that the implementation of the initiative put forward by the

I

President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin in 2006 which calls for for
developing global infrastructure of nuclear energy and setting up international
centers for nuclear fuel cycle services would make the foundation to fulfill this
task. Russia assumes that such a way will ensure control over proliferation of
sensitive NFC technologies without impeding the development of global nuclear
energy.
The first practical contribution of Russia in the implementation of this
approach was, as it is known, the establishment in cooperation with the Republic of
Kazakhstan, in 2007, of the Intemational Uranium Enrichment Centre (IUEC) in
Angarsk. Armenia and Ukraine joined the IDEC. In 2008, the IUEC received all
necessary authorizations and licenses to function as a product and service supplier
and was included in the list of Russian nuclear fuel cycle enterprises subject to the
IAEA safeguards. The IAEA safeguards have been officially applied there since
July 1,2010. Therefore, all the IUEC elements provided for by the agreement on
its establishment have been implemented.
In addition to the IUEC, upon Russia's initiative and based on the agreement

i

with IAEA the 120-ton five-percent-enriched uranium reserve has been established

\\

to ensure the guaranteed supplies. At the end of2010, the whole amount of nuclear

\

material necessary to establish this reserve was placed to a storage facility in
Angarsk under the IAEA safeguards, and the agreement with IAEA entered into
force. Besides, Russia bears all the expenses related to its storage, maintenance,
nuclear safety and security and safeguards application.
We confirm our continuous support to the 'IAEA project on the LEU bank /1
establislunent initiated with participation of the Russian Federation among others.
We welcome the consent of the Republic of Kazakhstan with the specific location
selected by the IAEA to place the LEU bank.
A new approach to assisting the countries that start to develop their own '
nuclear power is the pioneer application by Russia of the Build-Own-Operate
scheme to the construction ofNPP in Turkey. Such an approach fully addresses all

i

8

concerns

In

terms of nuclear proliferation as well as safe use of NPPs and

irradiated fuel management.

Distinguished Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is a key element, a sort of guarantor, of the ever expanding
international

c~op~~ in th~__~r~~ of peac~~~us~~f nucl~~~IRussia ~

ready to further cooperate with the NPT States Parties and is looking forward to
interacting closely in creating a truly state-of-the-art architecture of cooperation in
the peaceful use of nuclear power that would allow developing peaceful nuclear
energy in a safe manner without any threat of nuclear weapons proliferation, based
on the IAEA safeguards and multilateral approaches to nuclear fuel cycle.
Thank you, distinguished Mr. Chairman.

\

I,

,,

