Mr. Chairman,
Russia has steadfastly supported broad access of the NPT member states to the benefits of peaceful uses of atomic energy and cooperation in this area both on bilateral and multilateral basis.
We note the special role and importance of the IAEA, a competent and responsible organization that ensures global multilateral cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In this context, we believe it essential to pursue the course towards further enhancing the role and authority of the IAEA, including in developing technologies and cooperation between the Agency's member states.
We believe that assistance to developing countries and regions in the practical use of the power of the atom in energy, agriculture, industry and health must be provided, under the IAEA Statute, in unconditional compliance with the nuclear weapons non-proliferation regime.
We are confident that the importance of the Article IV of the NPT that guarantees development and safe use of nuclear energy will over time increase while contributing to strengthening the Treaty and its universalization.
In the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy the Russian Federation is cooperating with many NPT member states. This involves construction and operation of nuclear power stations, joint research, cooperation in ensuring nuclear security and safe radioactive waste management.
We attach great importance to the evolving cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with the CIS member states.
At present, nuclear energy, a technologically well-developed and time-tested branch of industry, occupies a noticeable place accounting for nearly 16 per cent of the world electric energy production. Next June we will be observing the 50th anniversary since launching the first nuclear power station in Obninsk. It has performed quire well throughout all these years, demonstrating in practice technical feasibility and viability of the nuclear energy technologies. In late June of this year together with the IAEA we will be holding an international conference titled ''Fifty years of atomic energy'1. We hope that it will provide a new impetus to the development and broad use of nuclear energy.
Further development of nuclear energy and its large-scale use will require resolution of a great number of new tasks, fundamental and comprehensive in nature and requiring a systemic approach. These tasks were addressed by the international project for innovative reactors and fuel cycle (INPRO) carried out at the Russian initiative under the IAEA auspices. The number of countries participating in the project is constantly growing and today comprises 17 states.
At present, the first phase of the project which tested, using specific national technologies, uniform requirements of the users and criteria of evaluating promising nuclear energy technologies is nearing completion.
The INPRO project seeks to address the problems of economic competitiveness, safety, spent fuel and radioactive waste management and makes it possible to minimize proliferation and environmental risks. An enhanced role of the INPRO project involving several states which are at the same time participants in another international project initiated by the US, i.e. the Fourth Generation forum, raise the issue of closer cooperation in the implementation of these two projects. Russia attaches special attention to the issues of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel management.
The choice of options for a rational and safe way of spent nuclear fuel management is determined by the requirement to ensure reliable nuclear and radiation safety, security of nuclear materials in terms of preventing situations where these materials may get into the hands of malefactors.
We also believe that internationalization of solution to the spent nuclear fuel problem and international cooperation in building and operating storage facilities provides economic, security and nuclear weapons non-proliferation benefits. In this context, we support IAEA General Director ElBaradei's proposal to establish, under the Agency's auspices, a working group on developing approaches to internationalizing sensitive technologies of the nuclear fuel cycle. This will objectively be an impediment to the increase of the number of countries possessing sensitive technologies under conditions of predictable development of a large-scale nuclear energy industry.
We attach great importance to the program of technical assistance in cooperation in the IAEA activity. Our country has for many years actively cooperated with the IAEA in implementing numerous projects seeking effective use of nuclear technologies applications in the areas that are important for developing the economies of the Agency's member states.
In recent years the Russian Federation has expanded its participation in the projects relating to safety and security issues, namely nuclear units safety, radiation security and safety of transportation and radioactive waste management.
One of the most important elements of technical assistance is helping to train national personnel and conducting scientific research. This participation involved supplies of Russian equipment, instrumentation and materials and organizing, at the domestic institutes and enterprises, the training of experts, including interregional and regional training courses.
Russia is assisting the NPT developing countries in building accelerators and neutron generators; it also supplies neutron radiography units, gamma-ray treatment equipment, liquid nitrogen production units, ionizing irradiation sources, and other equipment and materials.
Russia is taking part in the IAEA program to develop a network of regional international training demonstration centers for reprocessing and storage of radioactive wastes produced as a result of applying nuclear methods in health treatment, scientific research and industry. From 1999 within the framework of this program Russia has held annual regional demonstration IAEA courses for the CIS and East European countries.
Over the same period the courses have covered participants representing virtually all countries of the region.
Russia pays great attention to reliable safety transport of radioactive materials. Their transport in Russia is based on international law, requirements of the IAEA and other international organizations and on updating and improving the technical requirements. It is achieved through the existing well-developed national legislative and regulatory base in the field of radioactive materials management.
We are in favor of strengthening the internationally accepted regime regulating radioactive materials transport. We believe, however, that this should not erect unjustified barriers that are often incompatible writh the universally recognized rules of international law.
An example of successful international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is the project relating to an international thermonuclear experimental reactor. A unique engineering design for this reactor has already been developed. At present we have practically completed the negotiations on concluding the agreement on joint implementation of the project, China, South Korea and the United States have joined its participants. We are hopeful that in the nearest future complex negotiations on the selection of the site will be completed and that the project will be put on a practical track.
The International Science and Technology Center established with the objective of reorienting the knowledge and expertise of the scientists involved in developing and manufacturing weapons of mass destruction towards peaceful activities continues its work. This center is providing resources for civilian projects and is financing and organizing seminars and training courses.
In closing, we would like to note that the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is a core element and a guarantor of the constantly expanding international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Its unique structure was meant to last for decades and fits organically into the efforts to address the main tasks facing mankind over a longer term. Russia stands ready to continue to cooperate with the Treaty member states in resolving these tasks through peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.