Постоянное представительство
Российской Федерации
при ООН в Нью-Йорке

Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations in New
York

Unofficial translation
Check against delivery

STATEMENT
by Mikhail I. Uliyanov
Head of the Delegation of the Russian Federation
to the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Cluster 3: peaceful use of nuclear energy)

New York, 29 April - 9 May 2014

2

Mr. Chairman,
A growing interest in peaceful uses of nuclear energy is an objective trend of
today's world development. The Russian Federation believes that in the near future there
is no alternative to further developing and expanding the use of civil nuclear energy in
the world. A testimony to that fact is the outcomes of the IAEA International Ministerial
Conference "Nuclear Energy in the 21st century" that was hosted by Russia in June
2013.
The Conference brought together over 500 delegates from 87 countries and
became a milestone in shaping approaches that would define the development of nuclear
power decades ahead. In his address to the Conference President Putin of Russia said,
'We are ready to work together, ready to make a serious substantial contribution to
formation of a global strategy of nuclear power development in the 21st century.'
The final document of the Conference sets out an important dimension to the
development of the IAEA Member States. We are satisfied with a conclusion the
Conference arrived at, i.e. for many countries nuclear energy is a tested pure, safe, and
resource-efficient technology set to play a prominent role in ensuring energy security
and the Sustainable Development Goals in the 21st century and beyond.
Russia is one of many countries that promote nuclear power. The Government of
Russia has set the objective of increasing the share of nuclear power in our energy mix
from 16 up to 25 per cent. In Russia, 33 power units are in operation. In 2013, they
produced more than 171.6 bn kWh. 10 new units are being built, including the world's
first floating nuclear power plant "Akademik Lomonosov" which is scheduled to be
finished by 2016. Two targeted federal programmes on the key fields of nuclear power
development are worked out and approved in Russia.
Alongside with a large-scale construction of nuclear power plants with thermal
reactors, Russia is working on the creation of a new generation of closed nuclear fuel
cycle technologies and the 4th generation fast-neutron reactors. In the long term, Russia

3

associates nuclear power development with this type of reactors and with closed nuclear
fuel cycle.
Russia is the only country in the world where a 600 MW fast-neutron reactor
(BN-600) has been operating successfully for many years; we have also completed the
construction of the 800 MW reactor (BN-800). Now we are carrying out its start-up. An
experimental fast-neutron reactor based on the Russian technology and built with the
Russian assistance is operating in China.
The Research Institute of Atomic Reactors in Dimitrovgrad is fulfilling a project
of construction of a new multipurpose research fast reactor (MBIR) intended to replace
the only functional research fast reactor with sodium coolant BOR-60 present there. We
are planning to create an international research centre on the basis of the MBIR.
In 2014, we celebrate 60 years since launching the world's first nuclear power
plant in this country. On 27 June 1954 the nuclear power plant located near Moscow in
Obninsk with a 5 MW reactor "AM-1" (abbreviation of Russian words meaning
"peaceful atom") generated commercial electricity and opened the door to the civil
nuclear power. The plant has been successfully operating for 48 years.
The Russian Federation consistently advocates a broader access of the NPT States
Parties to the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy and promotes international cooperation
in this field.
However, we believe that the large-scale use of nuclear energy for the purposes of
economic development requires joint efforts of the countries concerned in implementing
a systemic approach to tackling complex tasks related to such development. Russia
became an initiator of the IAEA International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors
and Fuel Cycles (INPRO) and remains its major sponsor.
The Russian Federation notes with satisfaction the decision of the IAEA Director
General Yukiya Amano to turn the INPRO project into a fully operating section within
the Department of Nuclear Energy since January 2014.

4

INPRO has become a fully functional mechanism and a leading centre for a
comprehensive analysis of proposed and planned nuclear power systems, which
considers, among other things, such factors as infrastructure, security, minimization of
radioactive waste, and environment protection. This intellectual forum improves the
Member States' understanding of technological innovations and institutional specific
characteristics contributing to transition to sustainable nuclear power systems. The
number of countries taking part in INPRO has reached 40.
The International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project is yet
another example of Russia's successful contribution to the multilateral cooperation in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. We are inviting the Member States to take part in the
anniversary 25th Fusion Energy Conference organized by the IAEA with support of the
Government of the Russian Federation that will be held in Saint Petersburg from 13 to
18 October 2014.
Mr. Chairman,
All States Parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, under Article IV of the Treaty,
have the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It appears that one of the possible ways to enforce this right is the
participation in the international centres that provide services of nuclear fuel cycle
(NFC).
One of such centres is the International Uranium Enrichment Center (IUEC) in
Angarsk. The centre, established in 2007 under the Initiative by the President of the
Russian Federation in cooperation with the Republic of Kazakhstan, acts as a supplier of
nuclear products and services. Since 1 July 2010, nuclear materials at its site have been
safeguarded by the IAEA.
In 2010, initiated by the Russian Federation and by agreement with the IAEA, the
world's first reserve of low enriched uranium (LEU) was established at the site of the
IUEC in addition to the IUEC. Its volume is 120 tons of LEU up to 5%. The centre is
intended to provide guaranteed LEU supplies by IAEA's decision. The cost of such

5

reserve is about 185 million US dollars. At the same time, the Russian Federation bears
all the expenses associated with the storage, maintenance, nuclear safety and security, as
well as the application of safeguards.
We deem it an important task to ensure reliable access to the benefits of peaceful
nuclear energy for all the interested States Parties with due respect for the nonproliferation regime. We reaffirm our unfailing support for the IAEA project on
establishing its own LEU bank, initiated, among others, with the participation of the
Russian Federation. We welcome the Agency's decision to choose the site for the LEU
bank in the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Chairman,
National nuclear programmes cannot be developed without competent staff. We
pay special attention to training and knowledge retention. We have set up the
International Staff Training Centre where specialists from Vietnam, Turkey, Belarus and
other countries undergo training.
The Russian National Research Nuclear University (NRNU) "MEPhI" not only
trains personnel for the Russian nuclear power sector and its industry, but also admits
students and specialists from the IAEA Member States to train the national personnel for
nuclear power programmes. For example, NRNU "MEPhI" trains students from Turkey
and Vietnam.
Under paragraph 2 of Article IV of the NPT, for many years Russia has engaged
in active cooperation with the NPT States Parties in constructing and operating NPPs,
supplying nuclear fuel, equipment and nuclear materials, ensuring nuclear safety,
managing irradiated nuclear fuel and radioactive waste, and training atomic scientists.
We offer our partners NPP construction on a turnkey basis and on a build-ownoperate basis. It means that we are ready to adjust to the needs of a particular partner. In
addition, such approach will fully resolve all concerns with regard to nuclear nonproliferation, as well as safe NPP operation, and spent nuclear fuel (SNF) management.

6

We attach special importance to addressing the issues of SNF and radioactive
waste (RW) management. Russia has ratified the Joint Convention on the Safety of
SNF Management and the Safety of RW Management.
Mr. Chairman,
The use of nuclear energy requires attention to nuclear safety. We need to take
all measures to prevent future recurrence of disasters similar to the Chernobyl and the
Fukushima disasters. Since the end of the 1980s, the Russian Federation has been
implementing a major programme to modernize its nuclear reactors with the aim of
improving their safety. Success achieved in this area can be proved by the fact that the
number of events on Russian NPPs classified according to the International Nuclear
and Radiological Event Scale is small. Modern Russian nuclear reactors, particularly
those constructed within the NPP-2006 project, meet the highest international
requirements in the field of nuclear safety.
Compliance with the safety requirements while constructing, operating and
decommissioning Russian NPPs is supervised by an independent supervisory authority –
the Federal Environmental, Industrial and Nuclear Supervision Service.
Russia participates in the main international legal mechanisms in the area of
nuclear safety – the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Convention on Early
Notification of a Nuclear Accident, and the Convention on Assistance in Case of a
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency.
We note the success of the sixth meeting of the Contracting Parties to the
Convention on Nuclear Safety held in Vienna from 24 March to 4 April 2014. The
meeting adopted a number of amendments to the procedural documents of the
Convention aimed at applying the lessons learned from the accident at the Fukushima
Daiichi NPP. Such amendments include Russian proposals concerning the revision of
the existing design requirements for nuclear facilities in order to account for the adverse
effects of natural and man-made factors, to build adequate infrastructure in countries
planning to construct their first NPP, and to develop joint action procedures for

7

government bodies and institutions responsible for the operation of nuclear facilities to
ensure effective nuclear accident management.
Non-discriminatory and equitable international legal mechanisms for regulating
issues of liability for nuclear damage represent an important factor in the international
cooperation in the field of nuclear power. Russia is a Party to the 1963 Vienna
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage. We believe that this particular
mechanism provides the best basis for addressing issues of civil liability in cases of
transboundary nuclear damage associated with both the operation of nuclear facilities,
and with the movement of nuclear materials. We support the universalization of the
Convention. We emphasize that it is important for international conventions, as well
as for the domestic legislation of States on the civil liability, to contain the principle
that the operator of a nuclear installation shall be liable for damage caused by a
nuclear accident. We call upon those States which have not done so yet to accede to
one of the existing mechanisms for nuclear damage liability.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia shares the spirit and efforts of the international community aimed at a
wide introduction of radiation technologies into healthcare, water resources and
environment management, and agriculture. This is a large market presenting new
opportunities for the NPT States Parties as well as an innovation platform for
concerted efforts which help understand what the benefits are of participating in the
NPT. Russian institutes and laboratories show a great interest in coordinated research
projects conducted, in particular, under the IAEA auspices in the field of nuclear
science, food security, agriculture, healthcare, isotope production and environmental
protection. In 2013 the Agency signed 26 contracts and 22 agreements with the
Russian scientific institutes to conduct research on a free-of-charge basis in such areas
as atom fusion, radioactive waste treatment, including irradiated graphite, radiation

8

treatment of food, estimates of water reserves in glaciers, study of birds migration and
cultural artifacts.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia attaches great importance to the development of cooperation with the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States in the sphere of peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. We carry out regional projects aimed at building skills of medical
physicists from the CIS countries in the field of radio-oncology. In cooperation with
the IAEA, we elaborate projects to train specialists in the field of recultivation of areas
affected by uranium mining.
Russia recognizes the importance of the IAEA's technical cooperation
programme. The Russian Federation makes and will continue to make full voluntary
contributions to the Technical Cooperation Fund. We are in favour of retaining the
existing funding mechanism through assessments of Member States in their national
currency in an amount determined by the United Nations scale of assessments in
accordance with established practice. Through this fund, the Russian Federation is
assisting developing countries that are parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty in building
accelerators and neutron generators, supplies ionizing radiation sources, neutron
radiography units, gamma-ray treatment equipment, liquid nitrogen production units,
and other equipment.

Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is a key element and a sort of guarantee of the steadily expanding
international cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Russia stands ready to
continue working with the States Parties to the Treaty. We believe cooperation means
achieving development goals and expanding the peaceful use of nuclear energy, while
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

