STATEMENT BY THE SINGAPORE DELEGATION ON CLUSTER 3:
THE PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY, AT THE SECOND
SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020 NPT
REVIEW CONFERENCE, GENEVA, 23 APRIL – 4 MAY 2018
Mr Chairman,
1
Singapore strongly supports the inalienable right of all countries to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, science, and technology, in accordance with
Article IV of the NPT. In particular, developing countries can benefit from the
peaceful applications of nuclear science and technology to attain their
developmental targets, including the Sustainable Development Goals.
2
Singapore has been supporting the IAEA’s efforts to help Member
States, in particular the Least Developed Countries, gain access to the peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technology through the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme. Since 2000, Singapore has collaborated with the IAEA
to jointly provide technical assistance to developing countries on subjects such as
nuclear medicine, radiotherapy, food safety, nuclear law and regulations,
radiation protection, and emergency preparedness and response.
3
This partnership with the IAEA was formalised under the SingaporeIAEA Third Country Training Programme (TCTP) Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU), which was signed by IAEA Director General Mr Yukiya
Amano during his visit to Singapore in 2015. To date, Singapore has organised
a total of 36 workshops, hosted 111 training fellowships, and 25 scientific visits.
We will continue to work closely with the IAEA to provide more relevant
technical assistance to our partners under this TCTP MOU.
Mr Chairman,
4
Singapore recognises that States’ right to the peaceful uses of nuclear
science and technology cannot be divorced from the responsibility to uphold
nuclear safety and security. The IAEA plays a central role in helping Member
States build national and regional capacities in these important fields. Nuclear
incidents have trans-boundary impacts and require coordinated responses. We
should therefore continue to enhance nuclear safety, including by learning from
the lessons of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident, and
implementing the principles of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety. The
1

threat of nuclear and radioactive terrorism must also be taken seriously even if
they are not seen as the most imminent of threats. Nuclear installations are also
not immune to cyber-attacks. We must therefore remain committed to
continuously maintain and further strengthen nuclear security.
5
In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
has been enhancing regional cooperation on nuclear-related issues, particularly
through the ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy
(ASEANTOM). ASEANTOM also works closely with the IAEA to strengthen
nuclear safety capacity in the region. Recently in March 2018, Singapore and the
IAEA jointly organised a regional workshop on emergency preparedness and
response under the TCTP MOU. This workshop supported ASEANTOM’s
efforts in preparing a regional protocol to harmonise regional public
communications, as well as assessment and decision-making arrangements in the
event of nuclear and radiological emergencies in our region. We look forward to
further strengthening the cooperation between ASEAN and the IAEA.
6

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
.

.

.

.

.

2

