

Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the Slovak delegation I would like to congratulate you on your election and assure you of the support of the Slovak delegation in your responsible assignment. Slovakia aligns itself with the statement of the EU in this Committee, therefore I would like to dedicate my speech to few comments on national level.
Mr. Chairman,
The issue of the state regulation of the use of nuclear energy is of key importance for my country. On 1 July 1998, the Act on the Energy Management entered into force in Slovakia, which governs the terms and conditions for conducting business in the electricity, gas or heating industries. The Act also specifies that the license with regard to the use of nuclear power is subject to the approval by the Nuclear Regulatory Authority of the Slovak Republic (ÚJD). Also, on 1 July 1998, the so called Atomic Act entered into force, which, besides the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy regulates the obligations and rights in the safe use of nuclear energy and nuclear materials, conditions for management of radioactive waste and spent fuel, compensation of damages caused by nuclear accident, and regulates the state supervision at nuclear installations. On the basis of the Atomic Act sixteen subsequent regulations were or are being issued.
In January 2000, the Slovak Government approved a national medium-term energy concept a part of which is dedicated to the future role of nuclear energy. The main features of the future energy policy are: energy savings, environmental protection and energy price development. In line with this policy, nuclear energy remains an important source of energy in Slovakia.
The precondition of utmost importance for the use of nuclear energy is its safety. Recently the project on gradual reconstruction of the V-1 nuclear power plant in Jaslovské Bohunice was successfully finalized. The second unit of the Mochovce nuclear power plant started its operation after an extensive safety upgrading. Both projects, the reconstruction of the V-1 and the safety upgrading of the Mochovce nuclear power plant were the results of a successful international cooperation. The success was confirmed by two important events that took place in 1999.
In April 1999, according to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Review Meeting took place during which Slovakia presented its National Report and responded to more than 90 inquiries in a comprehensive and open way. The meeting confirmed that the results achieved in setting up a regulatory body and in the area of safety improvement programs were outstanding. It was recognized that the excellent performance in these areas enables Slovakia to share its expertise and experience with other countries having similar nuclear installations.
In June, the International Conference on Strengthening Nuclear Safety in Eastern Europe took place in Vienna. The report of the conference states, inter alia, that taking into account all the safety measures already implemented, Bohunice V-1 can be considered as an example of the safety level which can be achieved in this type of reactor. The safety improvement measures already implemented at the Bohunice V-2 and Mochovce nuclear power plant were also recognized by the Conference.
The IAEA's role was vital in the process of increasing the safety level achieved so far in all nuclear power plants. In 1998, the IAEA's Extrabudgetary Programme (EBP) on the Safety of WWER and RBMK Nuclear Power Plants was completed, what had a crucial influence on the safety improvement activities. In the course of the EBP a number of safety issues were addressed. The final report of the Programme states that "when the gradual reconstruction is completed, all IAEA recommendations for WWER-440/230 type reactors will be fulfilled at the Bohunice NPP Units V-1". However, a number of activities should be still performed in the future. One of them is to determine the status of implementation of safety improvements with respect to earlier IAEA recommendations. To demonstrate the improvements a specific Bohunice V-1 Safety Analyses Report after Gradual Reconstruction will be prepared by the operator and presented to the ÚJD with the aim to assess the overall safety impact of plant modifications. In addition, Slovakia intends to invite an IAEA mission to the Bohunice V-1 plant to assess the implementation of the IAEA's recommendations for safety improvement.
Besides technical services in the field of nuclear safety the cooperation with the IAEA has also other important aspect. Since the last NPT Review Conference Slovakia has cooperated with the IAEA in 12 national and in more than 30 regional and interregional projects. In this connection, on behalf of the Slovak Government, I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Director General Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei and the Secretariat for their contribution to promoting this cooperation.
Here I am pleased to inform that as in the previous years Slovakia will fulfill its obligations arising from technical cooperation with the IAEA.
As mentioned earlier the success in the peaceful use of nuclear energy is the result of a broad international cooperation to which bilateral activities contribute significantly. Since 1995, Slovakia has concluded bilateral agreements on cooperation with the Czech Republic, Poland, Ukraine, Canada, Bulgaria and Slovenia. In this connection, I would like to mention the outstanding relation with the Governments of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, Germany, France and the USA. These activities were mainly devoted to the development of human resources in the form of training and consultations, transfer of know-how and partially to the supply of equipment. This aspect was of major importance especially in the process of establishing the ÚJD in 1993, where a systematic training and transfer of regulatory approaches were vital. These countries provided on a timely basis the necessary framework for the said activities. The process is now reaching a new qualitative level. In cooperation with the IAEA and the Governments of Switzerland and the USA assistance projects are developed for countries of the former Soviet Union.
Last but not least, the cooperation with the European Commission was also essential in reaching the results in the field of the safe use of nuclear energy. A number of national and regional PHARE projects were devoted to the safety upgrading of nuclear installations and to strengthening the ÚJD.
Mr. Chairman,
Finally, let me emphasize that Slovakia is now not only a recipient country of technical assistance. As mentioned earlier assistance projects are developed in cooperation with other governments and the IAEA. These projects focus on assistance to other countries of the region and outside the region, by transferring the experience gained in the past. Slovakia provides a considerable financial support to the Chernobyl Shelter Fund administered by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. We stand ready to actively participate in technical assistance to other countries.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

