Permanent Mission of the Slovak Republic
in Geneva

Statement of
the delegation of Slovakia

at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III

Geneva, 1 May 2013

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf
of the European Union. Let me add now a few points from the
national perspective.

Mr. Chairman ,

Slovakia , as a state using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
recognizes a value of the Article IV of the NPT, which is a vital part of
the comprehensive bargain accomplished under the Treaty.

Slovakia fully supports peaceful use of nuclear energy. However,
trust and confidence are the key elements for its development if we
want to take full advantage of it. It must be realized hand in hand with
the highest safety and security standards as well as non-proliferation
conditions.

We understand

~hat

it may be a tough mission to develop an

universal appreciation for the peaceful - which at the same time
means non-violent - use of nuclear power in a world .

We have multilateral instruments at our disposal designed to verify
the absence of act·ivities not consistent with the NPT. We believe that
the full-scope safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and the Additional Protocol should become a current
verification standard, which would enable to provide a confidence that
nuclear energy is developed in the best non-proliferation conditions.
We must work towards universalisation and reinforcement of these
instruments.

Slovakia considers Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (CPPNM) and its Amendment as key tools of global nuclear
security. In February 2013 my country submitted the letters of
ratification of the Amendment of the CPPNM to the Director General
of the IAEA.
Slovakia will also actively participate in the IAEA International
Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global Efforts to be held
in July 2013 in Vienna with the objective to evaluate the outcQmes

achieved so far in the area of nuclear security and to review future
challenges in this field , mainly the threats linked to the nuclear
terrorism.

Mr. Chairman,

Nuclear energy is essential for meeting overall energy needs in
Slovakia. Nuclear power plants cover for a substantial percentage of
my country's electricity production . According to our national energy
strategy, nuclear energy will remain an important source of energy in
the long term.

Slovakia cooperates with the NPT State Parties and relevant
international organizations in all aspects of the nuclear programme.
International law, international partnership and sharing of expertise
have been important in development and sustainment of a safe and
secure nuclear programme in Slovakia.

We are now undergoing process of strengthening our nuclear energy
legislative framework to meet the highest standards of security, safety
and transparency that have been set by the IAEA, the European
Union and various international platforms. We have successfully
commenced the European stress tests and incorporated the lessons
learned into the National Action Plan. We encourage other countries
to perform risk and safety assessments for nuclear power plants in
operation and under construction in cooperation with the Agency.

Mr. Chairman,

In order to contribute to the international discussion in the area of
nuclear safety, Slovakia in close cooperation with the Government of
Japan recently hosted the International Symposium on Nuclear
Safety where experts shared both knowledge and impressions to
reinforce our approaches to more secure and technologically
advancing nuclear power production.
preparedness,

long-term

approach

Emergency management
to

nuclear

energy

and

humanitarian aspects were also addressed.

Slovakia

welcomes

the

forthcoming

International

Ministerial

Conference on Nuclear Power in the 21 st century that will be held in
Saint Petersburg and it stands ready to contribute to the discussion
on the viability and the prospects of the nuclear energy in this
century.

The real value of preventive measures and attitudes only become
apparent after they have failed to prevent harm. The NPT State
Parties have worked against such harm, and Slovakia fully agrees
that instead of being afraid, we should reinforce our focus on nuclear
safety and security and on maintaining nuclear power for peaceful
applications.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

