Statement by the Republic of South Africa during the Cluster 3 - Peaceful Uses of
Nuclear Energy Debate during the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
1 May 2018
[Check against delivery]
Thank you Chairperson ,
My delegation associates itself with the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Chairperson ,
Along with the legal commitment to the elimination of nuclear weapons and measures to
prevent proliferation , the NPT reaffirms the inalienable right to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy pursuant to Article IV of the Treaty. Peaceful nuclear co-operation and access to the
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, constitute
one of the core objectives of the Treaty. In giving effect to Articles IV (1) and IV (2), we
should therefore exercise caution not to seek to reinterpret, or restrict this inalienable right.
The inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology which is at the heart of
Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty is of particular relevance and importance in
attain ing sustainable and accelerated economic growth in Africa . In addition , nuclear power
and the peaceful applications of nuclear technology , if optimized to the fullest, can
meaningfully contribute to the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) .
In his Nuclear Technology Review report for 2017, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicated that the demand for nuclear power and the
application of nuclear technology will continue to increase in the coming years. According to
the IAEA 2030 projections , global nuclear power will increase by between 1.9% in the low
case scenario and 56% in the high case scenario . In this regard , nuclear power will continue
to be a viable option for many countries , including my own, in their quest to address energy
security challenges . In addition , nuclear science and technology will in our view continue to
contribute significantly to socio-economic development, including the attainment of the
SDGs . Through the Director General's emphasis on "Atoms for Peace and Development",
the Agency is now uniquely placed to reinforce the nexus between peace and development.
Chairperson ,

1

The IAEA has a leading role in the development and promotion of nuclear derived
technologies that improves food security, human and animal health, environmental
management and contributes to socio-economic development. Through the work of the
Agency the peaceful uses of nuclear energy has benefited all Member States, especially
developing countries . The Agency's nuclear application Laboratories are unique to the UN
system and through these laboratories the IAEA is able to develop and transfer much
needed and often lifesaving technologies and skills to Member States to , among others,
combat and eradicate animal diseases such as the Ebola and Zika viruses , contribute to
human health and the management of water resources .
Of particular value to the African continent has been the vaccines developed by the
IAEA/FAO Joint Division at the Agency's Nuclear Application laboratories at Seibersdorf, as
well as the nuclear techniques developed for the early and rapid diagnosis of animal and
zoonotic diseases. Similarly , the Sterile Insect Technique (SIT), developed by the Joint
Division to suppress pests such as the Tsetse fly and the fruit fly, is another example of the
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
The South African delegation attaches great importance to the role played by the Agency's
Nuclear Applications laboratories at Seibersdorf which continues to assist Member States in
enhancing their access to the peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. South Africa supports
the renovation and modernization of the Nuclear Application laboratories in Seibersdorf and
welcomes the realization of the 31 million Euros required to implement the first phase of the
ReNuAL project. We note with appreciation that resource mobilization efforts have now
shifted towards the implementation of the second phase of the ReNuAL to ensure the timely
and successfully completion of the project. In this regard, South Africa wishes to thank the
Member States who have made financial contributions to the first phase of ReNuAL project
and encourage Member States to continue to make financial contributions to this project.
Chairperson,
South Africa attaches great importance to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation (TC)
Programme which is the delivery vehicle through which peaceful uses of nuclear technology
is made available to countries. As such, it contributes towards addressing the socioeconomic needs and sustainable development challenges of developing countries. In our
view, the Agency's TC projects are more than just political commitments , they constitute
important building blocks to assist developing countries in their efforts to alleviate poverty
and achieve sustainable development goals. We therefore call on all IAEA Member States
to pay their assessed contributions to the TC Fund in full and on time .
In conclusion Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the integrity of the NPT rests on the fundamental bargain across
the three pillars of the Treaty, each of which must be recognized and upheld . The peaceful
use of nuclear energy is an inalienable and integral right that should not be compromised . In
this regard, the Treaty must be implemented in all its aspects without prejudice and no
aspect should be more strictly enforced or require stricter implementation than any other.
I thank you.
2

