Thank you, Chairperson,
Please accept my congratulations on your election to preside over this Main Committee and the assurance of my delegation's support for your efforts to steer our work to a successful conclusion. I also wish to note that South Africa associates itself with the statement that was made by the Non-Aligned Movement,
In view of the dichotomy of concerns regarding energy security and about the proliferation of sensitive nuclear technologies South Africa is of the view that peaceful nuclear co-operation and access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, are integral components of the Treaty. The peaceful use of nuclear technology is an inalienable right for all recognized in the Treaty and is of particular relevance and importance to Africa where there is an urgent need for sustainable and accelerated economic growth..
South Africa's nuclear energy policy is driven by issues of security of energy supply and global climate change, as well as beneficiation of our strategic mineral resources for the economic development of our country. The use of nuclear energy for electricity production is an option that many countries, including South Africa are considering in order to diversify their energy mix to ensure security of supply and to maintain their economies.
It is this with this in mind that South Africa continues to promote international co-operation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities, as envisaged in Article ill (3) of the Treaty, and also encourages the exchange of scientific information, particularly in Africa, for the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance with the NPT. Like many African countries, we therefore welcome projects supported and initiated by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that aim at promoting socio-economic and developmental aspects in developing countries.
South Africa acknowledges the increasing role that the IAEA will have to play in the future, as more countries turn to nuclear energy and other applications. Many States are approaching the Agency to advise them in the preparatory, start-up, running and end-life phases of their nuclear facilities, in particular, developing countries look towards the Agency to draw from lessons learned, shared experience and advice for best practice in relation to peaceful nuclear applications and technologies.
South Africa therefore continues to attach great importance to the promotional role of the Agency, as stipulated in Article II of the IAEA Statute, aiming to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. South Africa also continues to encourage international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear activities, as envisaged in Article III (3) of the NPT, through exchanges of information, particularly for developing countries, for the further development of the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in order to address their socio-economic development needs.
The Agency's promotional role can only be effectively fulfilled with additional resources being provided to the IAEA. South Africa therefore welcomes the announcement made by the US to increase its financial contributions towards the promotional activities of the Agency and urges all other States in a position to do so, to emulate the US example.
Chairperson,
in view of its plans to build multiple nuclear plants to address the country's power deficit and reduce its carbon footprint, South Africa appreciates the Agency's guidelines aiming at assisting Member States, particularly developing countries, interested in plans to embark on nuclear energy production and looks forward to enhance cooperation with the IAEA in this respect.
South Africa furthermore recognizes the importance of the Agency's technical cooperation programme and projects in the practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses and recognizes their crucial contribution to sustainable development, particularly in developing countries. In this regard, we believe that the funding of TC programmes needs to be sufficient, assured and predictable (SAP) and that it is time to correct mistakes of the past by incorporating the TC programme, a core statutory function of the Agency, into the Agency's regular budget. South Africa further believes that the linking of future TC programmes and the regular budget cycles will go a long way towards addressing some of the challenges facing the Agency's TC programme.
In South Africa's view, many of the IAEA's TC projects are of strategic importance to developing countries, particularly African countries, and can provide the necessary impetus for accelerated economic development, thereby playing a meaningful role in the achievement of the MDGs and in enhancing the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), thus contributing towards alleviating poverty in the region. The Agency's efforts in strengthening regional TC projects, such as AFRA, for the African region, would go a long way in achieving these goals. Therefore, my delegation would like to urge the Agency to continue its efforts in this regard.
Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the strength, credibility and permanence of the NPT rest on a fundamental bargain which must be recognized and upheld. The peaceful use of nuclear energy is an inalienable and integral right that should not be compromised, in this regard, the Treaty must be implemented in all its aspects without favour or prejudice and no aspect should be more strictly enforced or require stricter implementation than any other. As a multilateral instrument, which was negotiated and equally agreed to by the members of the international community, all aspects of the Treaty must be implemented equally, including the very important issue of peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
I thank you, Chairperson.









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



