2017-05-10 Check against delivery!

NPT Prep Com 2017 – Cluster III – Statement by Sweden

Mr Chairman,

Sweden aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union under this
cluster. Our general priorities are also reflected in the comprehensive working
papers prepared by the European Union and the Vienna Group of Ten. In
addition, I would like to make the following remarks in a national capacity.

Mr Chairman,
All Parties to the Treaty are granted an inalienable right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful uses. This right is to be exercised
without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the NPT. The
IAEA makes an essential contribution in advancing article IV of the treaty,
including through the Peaceful Uses Initiative.
It is important not to perceive nuclear safety and security as hindrances – but rather
as the precondition for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Technical cooperation
is an important element when fostering nuclear safety and security. Sweden has a
long-standing cooperation with various countries in both these fields.

Peaceful uses of nuclear energy can play a role in realizing the Sustainable
Development Goals. The IAEA, through its Technical Cooperation Programme,
can assist states parties in the peaceful uses. The Agency is making an active
contribution, in understanding the impacts of ocean acidification through the

application of nuclear techniques, to the upcoming Ocean Conference to be held
next month in New York. This conference, for which Fiji and Sweden jointly took
the initiative, is the first major conference to focus on a specific Sustainable
Development Goal.

Mr Chairman,

Sweden emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and the
development of common approaches for nuclear safety. At the 7th Review Meeting
of the Convention on Nuclear Safety Sweden reaffirmed its commitment and
fulfillment of obligations under the Convention. This includes adoption of the
principles and objectives of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety as
cornerstones of nuclear safety. We look forward to further work, efforts and
discussions with the aim of enhancing Nuclear Safety worldwide.

Sweden strongly believes that peer review mechanisms contribute to further
strengthening nuclear safety and security as well as building confidence. We
encourage the sharing of best practices and results from peer review missions. At
the request of Sweden, an Integrated Regulatory Review Service as well as an
International Physical Protection Advisory Service follow-up mission, were recently
conducted to Sweden. The reports from those missions are accessible on the
website of the Swedish Radiation Safety Authority.

Last year’s entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection on Nuclear Material, was very welcome and Sweden looks forward to its
universalization. We urge all states that have not already done so, to become party
to the amended Convention and to ratify and implement the amendment as soon
as possible. Its entry into force will create additional momentum for future IAEA

actions in this area including the preparation for the first Conference of State
Parties.

Thank you Mr Chairman

