S
Mr Chairman,
The NPT Review Conference of 2010 adopted over twenty measures regarding the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. Most of them concern the right to nuclear cooperation. This aspect is crucial, as the inalienable right
of the state parties to use nuclear energy for civil purposes constitutes a key element of the compromise
which enabled the NPT to come into existence.
Mr Chairman,
The generation of electricity is one of the key aspects of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. By way of
illustration, I would point out that almost 440 nuclear reactors are currently operating worldwide – some of
them have been running for more than 30 years – while over 70 others are in the process of being built. At
the same time, nuclear power also plays a significant role in the areas of public health, the environment,
water resource management and agriculture. Switzerland welcomes the crucial role the IAEA plays through
its programme of technical cooperation and assistance and through its work to promote nuclear sciences
and applications.
That said, in order to make a useful and effective contribution to development, the peaceful use of nuclear
energy places certain requirements on the states wishing to develop it. In this regard, my delegation would
like to highlight in particular the following points:
First, the peaceful use of nuclear energy goes hand in hand with states' responsibilities regarding nuclear
non-proliferation and security. In this respect my delegation has made its point of view abundantly clear
already under Chapter II.
Second, the peaceful use of nuclear energy goes hand in hand with states' responsibilities regarding nuclear
safety. The Fukushima nuclear disaster was a cruel reminder of the need for a global policy in this area that
is applied in the strictest terms. Switzerland is strongly committed to this and believes that a number of
options are available for a reinforcement of nuclear safety:


the existing tools must be reinforced. In this regard, Switzerland encourages states not already having
done so to adhere to the Convention on Nuclear Safety without delay and to implement the various
codes of conduct relating thereto. Switzerland also encourages the participating states to play an active
part in the diplomatic conference which will commence in 2015 to negotiate a draft amendment – as
proposed by my country – aimed at strengthening the Convention on Nuclear Safety.



the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety adopted in 2011 must be fully implemented without delay. This
plan contains a number of highly useful proposals, such as the introduction of regular peer review
missions, greater transparency from the national authorities concerned in their reporting and in the
implementation of recommendations resulting from review missions, as well as the use of the state-ofthe-art standards in terms of nuclear safety.

3



new multilateral measures must be identified that go beyond the 2011 Action Plan. In view of its global
character and unique expertise, the IAEA is the best platform available for the international community to
achieve this objective.

Finally, in the area of civil liability, Switzerland would like to see all states adhere to one of the relevant
conventions so that a global regime for civil liability can be established.
Mr Chairman,
Responsible development of nuclear technologies is vital for communities to be able to meet the
demographic, economic and environmental challenges facing them in the future. Switzerland for its part will
continue to make available to the international community its experience and expertise in the safe and longterm operation of nuclear technologies.
Thank you for your attention.

4

