
Mr Chairman,
In 2010, the NPT Review Conference adopted more than twenty actions in the field of peaceful use of
nuclear energy. Regarding their implementation, we would like to emphasize the three following
elements.
Firstly, most of these actions focused on issues related to the right to nuclear cooperation. This is
essential, because the inalienable right of States Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful uses
constitutes one of the key-elements of the compromise at the origin of the NPT. As stated by the IAEA
in the General Debate, the number of nuclear cooperation projects continues to grow, particularly in
developing States. It is therefore possible to assert that the objectives contained in these actions
adopted in 2010 have been broadly met.
Despite this positive assessment, Switzerland however sees two areas of concern. The first relates to
the preferential treatment granted to non-nuclear-weapon States Parties, as contained in Action 50.
The increased nuclear cooperation of some States Parties with nuclear-armed States that are not
Parties to the NPT raises questions related to the scope of this action and undermines the credibility of
the NPT. The second concern is related to the extra-budgetary wntributions to the IAEA as mentioned
in Action 55. Switzerland remains of the view that - since nuclear cooperation is a statutory task of the
IAEA

- it will be necessary to raise the question whether the Technical Cooperation Fund and the

extra-budgetary wntributions should not eventually be incorporated into the IAEA regular budget.
Mr. Chairman,
A second area highlighted in the 2010 actions is the one related to the multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle. Here, it should be noted that, since 2010 NPT Review Conference, the IAEA Board
of Governors approved the establishment of the first nuclear fuel bank run by the Agency as well as a
mechanism on the Assurance of Supply. The objectives contained in the actions related to the nuclear
fuel cycle have thus been achieved. While Switzerland supports the establishment of multilateral
approaches, it has however underlined its concern to maintain a market diversification.

Mr. Chairman,
The third and final point I would like to underline is nuclear safety. Since the 2010 Review Conference,
the world experienced a new major nuclear accident with the drama of Fukushima. This put the issue
of nuclear safety at the top of the international diplomatic agenda. As a consequence, the actions
related to nuclear safety have already become

- and will continue to

remain - more significant than

they were in 2010.
Switzerland has been strongly involved in the negotiating process which leaded to the adoption of the
September 2011 IAEA Action Plan on nuclear safety. Switzerland considers essential that - ultimately

- the international community would be able to create a multilateral nuclear safety regime. In this
context, Switzerland believes that the following three aspects should be taken into account:
First aspect, the implementation of the inalienable right of States Parties to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes will have to better take into account the requirements of nuclear safety. In this
context, Switzerland calls upon all States that have not yet done so to implement as soon as
possible the conventions and codes of conduct related to nuclear safety. Switzerland also
encourages the States suppliers of nuclear technology to provide new comers in the area of
civilian nuclear energy with a level of cooperation enabling them to develop the appropriate skills
to manage such a source of energy.
Second aspect, the IAEA Action Plan on nuclear safety should be quickly implemented by all
States Parties. Indeed, it is essential to develop a universal culture of nuclear safety. In this
context, Switzerland welcomes the intense work already done by the IAEA after the accident in
Fukushima.
Third and final aspect, in the long-term stronger mechanisms for safety verification will be needed.
The IAEA Action Plan on nuclear safety cannot be considered as an end in itself but rather as a
step in a process that should lead us to commitments of a more binding nature. In this respect,
Switzerland has presented the working paper Nr. 18 and will continue its commitment in
strengthening nuclear safety, especially during the August 2012 Review Conference of the
Convention on Nuclear Safety.
Thank you for your attention.

