My delegation would like to make a brief statement regarding certain aspects of the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
I should like to begin by recalling that my country remains fully committed to the principle stated under Article IV of the NPT, concerning the inalienable right to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The recent discovery of a dangerous black market in nuclear technology does by no means diminish the importance of the existing system of safeguards of the IAEA. It is this system indeed which makes it possible to verify the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes, which is an essential aspect of nuclear non-proliferation. My country therefore calls on all States which have not yet done so to conclude without further delay full-scope safeguards agreements with the IAEA.
While stressing the importance of the efficiency of safeguards and of their strengthening, we remain convinced that rationalization is still possible in this area. They require an in-depth analysis of the inspection methods currently applied and in some cases a redefinition of priorities.
Regarding the concrete measures recently proposed for the purpose of strengthening IAEA safeguards in the light of the new challenges, Switzerland is in favour of the largest possible application of the Additional Protocols to the safeguards agreements with the Agency. My country has signed such a protocol and hopes to complete the procedures for the entry into force in the coming months. We also support the proposal to make the signing of such an additional protocol a condition for authorisation of the transfer of nuclear items.
Switzerland welcomes the proposals to fill the gaps in the non-proliferation regime. As in the past, we will not tolerate that nuclear weapons are developed under the disguise of peaceful programmes. However, my country
is unable to support the idea of a general prohibition to export certain sensitive technologies to States which do not already possess such technology. Indeed, such restrictions would be contrary to the inalienable right of peaceful use under Article IV of the NPT and discriminate even more against non-nuclear weapon States parties to the NPT - in particular against those who have impeccable non-proliferation records. In our view, the existing norms, in particular the Nuclear Suppliers' Guidelines, are sufficiently clear and have demonstrated their effectiveness.
On the other hand, my authorities have found interesting certain proposals put forward by the IAEA Director General, Mr. El Baradei. In particular his proposal to create a centre where records would be kept of all operations involving nuclear fuel and exchanges of nuclear technology deserves consideration. My country is therefore in favour of the creation by the IAEA of a group of experts with the task of analysing these proposals.
We must continue to ensure that the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the international exchanges which it requires do not give rise to illicit operations, or possibly even terrorist acts focused on nuclear installations or material. It is for this purpose that Switzerland has taken an active part in the work of the various groups of experts for the revision of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. The "Principles and Fundamentals for physical protection of nuclear installations and material" which the IAEA Board of Governors has adopted should be incorporated in the national legislation and implemented by each of the NPT States parties. We hope that a diplomatic conference can adopt as soon as possible the proposed additions and amendments to this Convention.
Finally, 1 would like to recall that nine countries, including Switzerland and all the nuclear-weapons States, have in 1997 adopted Guidelines for the Management of Plutonium. The participating States have undertaken to periodically publish documents relating to their management of plutonium. These Guidelines (published by the IAEA as document INFCIRC/549) are a
contribution to transparency in the management of fissile material. The final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference encouraged all States in possession of plutonium for civil purposes to adopt similar measures and to consider similar policies for the management of highly enriched uranium. Working Paper NPT/CONF.2005/PC.III/WP.10 recalls these facts. It also contains several recommendations which this 3rd session of the Preparatory Committee could transmit to next year's Review Conference. The nine participating States think that it would be appropriate that the 2005 Review Conference welcomes and encourages, in its final document, once again measures of transparency in the area of plutonium and highly enriched uranium.
In conclusion, let me simply note that the peaceful use of nuclear energy should aim at the development and welfare of the people. We therefore have to strike a fair balance between rules to avoid misuse and the risk of unjustified discrimination of non-nuclear weapons States that already offer excellent non-proliferation credentials.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your attention.