Thailand associates itself with the statement on Cluster III as delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned States Parties to the NPT My delegation would like to share our views regarding nuclear application for peaceful purposes as follows:
First, Thailand regards the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as one of the three principal pillars of the NPT, all of which are mutually reinforcing. Thailand wishes to reiterate its longstanding position that it is an inalienable right of all States to develop all aspects of nuclear science and technology without discrimination, as long as it is aimed and used for peacefi.il purposes and under the hill compliance with the obligations under the NPT. We believe that efforts to utilize technology and knowledge related to peaceful uses of nuclear energy can contribute significantly to sustainable development and the attainment of MDGs of countries around the world.
Second, the recent energy crisis and the ongoing challenges related to climate change have prompted countries around the world to look into innovative ways and means to ensuring their respective energy security. Countries that are heavily dependent on energy import to fuel their economic growth now have to find ways to hedge against ftiture volatility of the energy market or a possible abrupt disruption of supply. It is within this context that the development of nuclear energy has been proposed and discussed in many countries. For Thailand, we consider the development of nuclear energy as a potentially new and promising alternative source of energy, which would play an essential role in fulfilling the country's growing energy demand and guaranteeing the country's long-term energy security.
Third, Thailand is of the view that safety and security must be a priority for every nuclear energy development programme and an essential element to ensure public confidence
in the endeavour. In this connection, we call on countries that have established and developed nuclear power facilities to abide by their obligations to tlie existing international agreement on nuclear safety and security.
Fourth, Thailand would like to stress the need for countries that have developed nuclear power facilities to put in place a safeguard system in response to an emergency, such as nuclear or biological accident. Thailand is already a party to the international instrument regarding early notification of a nuclear accident and assistance in the case of emergency We have also seriously considered a possibility of becoming a party to other relevant instrument on nuclear safety and security, especially the Convention on Nuclear Safety. We are commit ted (o strengthening the system of notification, licensing, inspection and enforcement of radiation safety and radioactive sources security.
Last but not least* Thailand be! ieves that the IAEA has an important role to play in assisting Member States, through its technical cooperation programmes, to develop their technical capacity, infrastructure and legal framework for the actual transfer and development of technology and knowledge related to all peaceful nuclear applications. For example, Thailand has been working closely with the IAEA, through its Technical Cooperation activities, on a number of programmes ranging from nuclear medicine, irrigation, agriculture, soil conservation, improvement of soil and water quality, to industrial applications, especially in the process of optimization, product quality enhancement and control, material testing as well as energy saving and pollution control.
In conclusion, I would like to once again reiterate Thailand's firm commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear power and our strong support for the important role of the IAEA in the area of capacity building for its Member States.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.