Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA
48 COTTAGEGASSE 1180 VIENNA
TEL (431) 478 3335 • FAX (431) 478 2907

Statement by
Ms. Pajaree Varathorn,
Second Secretary,
Peace, Security, and Disarmament Division,
Department of International Organizations,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand

at Cluster III : Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy,
the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

9 May 2017, Vienna

Mr. Chair,
1. My delegation wishes to begin by underlining the balanced implementation
and equal importance of the three main pillars of the NPT – namely, nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
2. Of paramount importance to Thailand are the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
under the NPT. This pillar was part of the grand bargain during the negotiations
of the Treaty half a century ago. Today, this pillar has contributed significantly
to our efforts toward the attainment of the SDGs.
3. We therefore underscore that non-nuclear-weapon States’ commitment under
the NPT must be matched by the genuine efforts of nuclear-weapon States in the
implementation of their respective obligations, particularly those pertaining to
nuclear disarmament as stipulated in Article VI of the Treaty.

Mr. Chair,
4. Thailand wishes to re-emphasize the inalienable right of all States Parties to
the NPT to the development, research, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination, as enshrined in Article IV of the
Treaty. We call for the continued respect of such right and oppose any undue
restrictions or efforts that may affect it.
5. The international community has without doubt immensely benefited from the
peaceful applications of nuclear energy in wide-ranging civilian fields, such as
nuclear power, food and agriculture, health, water management and industrial
applications, among others. These applications have made positive contributions
to national development and can further accelerate global efforts toward
sustainable development.
6. Thailand appreciates the central role of the IAEA in the promotion of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in particular through its Technical Cooperation
Programme, and commends the IAEA’s unwavering commitment in this regard.
In return, Thailand reiterates its commitment to support the Agency’s activities
by hosting several IAEA regional meetings, workshops and training courses
annually. Thailand stands ready to be a regional hub for technical cooperation,
providing training in many areas which we have benefited from IAEA’s TC
contributions, to experts from other countries in the region.

7. For the TC Programme to be effective, there is a need to ensure that resources
for TC activities are sufficient, assured and predictable. We urge all States
Parties to the NPT that are Members of the IAEA to make their financial
contributions to the IAEA’s TC Fund in full and on time. We also welcome any
additional extrabudgetary contributions in this respect.
8. My delegation further recognizes that while pursuing peaceful uses of nuclear
energy; nuclear safety, security and safeguards should be carefully taken into
account. Yet, these considerations must not pose as hindrance to the right to
peaceful uses. Instead, they should aim to strengthen peaceful uses activities.
9. With the new Nuclear Energy for Peace Act B.E. 2559 (2016), Thailand is
well-equipped with the legal framework that not only allows us to implement our
international obligations in a more effective manner, but also provides penal
measures against illegal activities. This Act also allows Thailand to become a
party to major international instruments in promoting the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, non-proliferation, and disarmament.
Mr. Chair,
9. Before closing, Thailand is proud to be part of the dynamic ASEAN
Community. ASEAN has undertaken many initiatives to support our
contributions to international peace and security. In the context of our
obligations under Articles II and IV of the Treaty, we are realizing our collective
commitment to ensuring the highest standards of safety, security and safeguards
in activities relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy within ASEAN in
accordance with IAEA’s standards and guidelines. Since 2013, ASEAN has
formed the ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies or ASEANTOM to be the
driving force behind this undertaking. Thailand fully supports ASEANTOM
and has hosted many activities, including its inaugural and second meetings, as
well as workshops covering various technical areas such as nuclear forensics,
radiation biodosimetry, environmental radioactivity measurement as well as
emergency preparedness and response.
10. We appreciate the IAEA for approving a regional TC project on nuclear
emergency preparedness and response for the ASEAN region for the period of
2016-2017 with a possible extension to 2019. Thailand is ready to work towards
closer cooperation between ASEAN and the IAEA on this matter.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.
-------------------

