*** Please check against delivery***
Statement by the Delegation of Thailand
by Ms. Morakot Sriswasdi, Deputy Director-General, Department
of International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Cluster III on Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy,
for the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 NPT Review Conference,
23 April - 4 May 2018, Geneva
Mr. Chair, .

1. Thailand aligns itself with the NAM statement delivered by th~ distinguished 路
representative of Indonesia.
2. My delegation underlines the equal importance and balanced implementation
of the three main pillars of the NPT - namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear
non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
3. Thailand attaches paramount impof1:anceto the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy under the NPT, which is contributing significantly to global efforts
toward the attainment of the SDGs. This pillar was part of the grand bargain
during the negotiations of the Treaty half a century ago as well as when
the Treaty was extended indefinitely in 1995. We, therefore, underscore that
the commitment of non-nuclear-weapon States under the NPT must be
reciprocated 路by the genuine efforts of nuclear-weapon States m
the implementation of their respective obligations, particularly those pertaining
to nuclear disarmament as stipulated in Article VI of the Treaty.
Mr. Chair,

4. Thailand re-emphasizes the inalienable right of all States Parties to the NPT
to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination, as enshrined in Article IV of the Treaty. We call for

- 1-

the continued respect of such right and oppose any undue restrictions or 路efforts
that may affect it.
5. The international community has immensely benefited from the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in wide-ranging fields. Thailand appreciates the central
role of the IAEA in the promotion of such uses, in particular through
its Technical Cooperation Programme.
6. For the Technicat Cooperation Programme to be effective, there is a need to
ensure that resources for TC activities are sufficient, assured and predictable.
Recalling Action 54 of the outcome document of the 2010 NPT RevCon,
we encourage all States Parties to the NPT that are Members of the IAEA to
make their financial contributions to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund in
full and on time.
7. Additional extrabudgetary resources for IAEA activities are also welcome.
For our part, last year we were. pleased to make extrabudgetary contributions
to the IAEA in support of its Peaceful Uses Initiative and the Renovation of
the Nuclear Applications Laboratories or ReNuAL project.
8. Thailand reaffirms its commitment to the IAEA. We have also continued to
provide in-kind contributions to the IAEA through hosting several IAEA
workshops and training courses annually. In 2018, we will host a total of
18 IAEA activities - a record number in a calendar year. Furthermore,
determining to elevate its cooperation with the IAEA, Thailand expresses its
willingness to serve as an IAEA regional training hub in the areas of its
expertise such as water resource management, control of vector-borne diseases
and nuclear safety.
Mr. Chair,
9. My delegation recognizes that the pursuit of peaceful uses of nuclear energy
must be accompanied by nuclear safety, security and safeguar1s. Yet, these
considerations should not pose as hindrance to the right to peaceful uses.
Instead, they should aim to strengthen peaceful uses activities.
-2-

10. In this regard, Thailand has made every effort to strengthen its domestic
legislations in order to ensure the above. Thailand's _Nuclear Energy for Peace
Act has put in place an adequate domestic legal framework for Thailand to not
only .further .utilize peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a more comprehensive
manner but also to allow us to become a party to remaining major international
instruments related to nuclear matters. This is in line with Actions 10, 28 and
59 of the 2010 outcome document.
Mr. Chair,

11. Regional cooperation to promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy is
significant. Thailand is proud to be part of the dynamic ASEAN Community.
ASEAN has undertaken many initiatives to strengthen international peace
and security. In the context of our obligations under Articles II, III and IV of
the NPT, ASEAN Member States, through the regional network of regulatory
bodies or ASEANTOM, are realizing our collective commitment to ensuring
the high standards of safety, security and safeguards, in accordance with IAEA
路 standards, in our activities relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
12. ASEAN Member States are also working towards the institutionalization of
ASEANTOM, including through the establishment of its Secretariat and
designated website, as well as developing an ASEANTOM Work Plan for
a short or medium term. In addition, Thailand supports the further enhancement
of ASEAN's cooperation with the IAEA through ASEANTOM, and looks
forward to an early formalization of ASEAN - IAEA relations.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.

-3-

