PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
IN VIENNA
COTTAGEGASSE 48, 1180, VIENNA
TEL (+431) 478 3335 FAX (+431) 478 2907

Statement

Ms. Siriratana Biramontri
Director of Technical Support for Safety Regulation,
Office of Atoms for Peace of Thailand
before the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 3 Specific issue - Peaceful uses of nuclear energy and other
provisions of the Treaty

30 April-11 May 2012
United Nations, Vienna
Please check against delivery

Statement by Ms. Siriratana Biramontri
Director of Technical Support for Safety Regulation,
Office of Atoms for Peace of Thailand
before the First session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Cluster 3 Specific issue - Peaceful uses of nuclear energy and other
provisions of the Treaty
30 April - 11 May 2012

United Nations, Vienna

Mr. Chairman,
First of all, Thailand would like to associate ourselves with the statement
made by the distinguished delegate of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) States parties to the NPT.
1.

Mr. Chairman,
2.
Article IV of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty recognises the rights
of States parties to peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Final Doculnent of the
20 10 NPT Review Conference also recognises the importance of cooperation
amongst States parties, as well as through the IAEA, to promote peacefbl uses
of nuclear energy. Thailand is of the view that it is crucial for peaceful uses of
nuclear energy to be carried out in a sustainable, safe and secure manner.
3.

Thailand is fully committed to the principles of safety, security and
safeguards for the use of nuclear energy. We have long enjoyed close
cooperation with the IAEA, pal-titularly in the areas of public health, food and
nutrition, industrial application, energy and water management - the last area
was illustrated by our exhibition during the Scientific Forum, paralleled to the
55"' IAEA General Conference in Vienna in 20 11. After the recent severe flood,
which significantly affected agricultural areas in Thailand, the Emergency
Support to Thailand's Flood Relief and Rehabilitation Efforts programme has
been set up to improve agricultural and livestock production, as well as soil and
water inanagelnent through the application of nuclear techniques.

rile prograinrne has been carried out with the IAEA's emergency funding, with
an aim towards advancing the agricultural industry in a sustainable manner.

Pvlr. Chairinan.
4.
In recent years, the global demand for the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes has been on the rise. Thailand is of the view that safe, secure
and peaceful uses of nuclear energy can also be effectively promoted at the
regional level. Thailand's proposal to establish a network amongst nuclear
regulatory bodies in ASEAN, which has been welcoined by ASEAN Leaders at
the 20t1' ASEAN S~lniilitis a serious attempt to uphold the level of nuclear
safety, security and safeguards in the region based on the IAEA standards and
practices.
Mr. Chairman,

5.
Although we have postponed our decision to embark the nuclear power
plant programme for three years right after the Fukushiina accident, we are
currently working towards ensuriitg the ~ ~ l a x i ~ nlevel
u l r ~of safety and security of
the programme, once embarked, in accordance with the IAEA standards.
n
Mr. Chai r ~ art,

6.
Thailand reiterates once again our commitment towards the global
nuclear safety, security and safeguards regimes. We are currently working
towards becoming a party to all relevant international legal instruments, as well
as cooperating with our partners and the IAEA in order to safely and securely
utilise nuclear energy for solely peaceful purposes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

