
Mr.Chairman,
Turkey's energy policy is based on the security, sustainability and competitiveness of her energy supply. It is designed to sustain targeted economic and social growth in the long run.
Securing Turkey's energy supplies requires the utilization of our domestic resources to the highest possible extent and the diversification of our imports in terms of source and variety.
Attributed to its well proven safety record and cost effectiveness, nuclear power is estimated to be one of the major components of our energy supply mix in the medium to long term.
Our electricity supply and demand studies suggest the need for the commissioning of nuclear power plants into the Turkish electricity grid during the next decade. We expect that nuclear power will contribute to around 5-6% of our total installed capacity by the year 2020. We aim to diversify the portfolio of electricity generation options and to reduce our heavy dependence on imported fossil fuels, through the sequential commissioning of nuclear power.
Mr.Chairman,
Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the fundamental objectives of the NPT. Non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are two interrelated aspects of the Treaty. They are indeed complementary and mutually reinforcing. We see it essential the role of the IAEA in assisting developing States parties in the peaceful use of nuclear energy through the development of effective programmes aimed at improving their scientific, technological and regulatory capabilities.
We also appreciate the Agency's role in providing guidance to Member States in launching a nuclear power programme for the first time. We shall continue to cooperate closely and fully with the Agency both in launching and operating our prospective nuclear energy programme.
Turkey is fully supportive of the greatest possible enjoyment of the benefits of nuclear energy for NPT States that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. We must ensure that all necessary steps are taken to ensure that there is no increased risk of weapons proliferation associated with the expansion of nuclear energy.
There has been considerable interest shown recently in the development of a new framework for the utilization of nuclear energy based on multilateral approaches to the fuel cycle. An important consideration is that States need to have confidence that they would be able to obtain their nuclear fuel in a predictable, stable and cost effective manner over the long term.
In this context, the right of each NPT State to decide on matters concerning the development of its own national fuel cycle capabilities should also be respected. It should therefore be up to States to decide whether they would want to participate in the further development and implementation of the proposals on the assurances of fuel supply. States which may decide to join such a multilareral arrangement would need to have confidence in a well functioning market. They would also like to have back-up mechanisms with the objective of protecting themselves against politically motivated disruptions.
Turkey has been closely following the developments to establish a new framework for assurance of supply of nuclear fuel and welcomes the IAEA's efforts in this regard.
Let me conclude by expressing our strong support to the Agency's Technical Cooperation Programme. Indeed, we see it as an important instrument of extending assistance, in various humanitarian areas, to countries which need it.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.