Statement by Turkey
IInd Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster III
(1 May 2018, Geneva)
Check against delivery
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey strongly supports the inalienable right of states to benefit from the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT.
We attach importance to the fact that, the NPT aims to preserve a crucial balance through the
two aspects of its overarching objective regarding peaceful uses.
On the one hand, it aims to ensure that the benefits of nuclear energy are available to all
states on equitable terms and through international cooperation. While on the other, it strives
to make sure that the use of nuclear energy does not lead to the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and does not endanger human and environmental health and safety.
This is a most sensitive and important facet of the Treaty, as the use of nuclear technologies
continues to grow.
The IAEA’s annual publication on energy and electricity projections show that nuclear
power’s global potential remains high in the coming decades. The renewed interest in nuclear
energy for power generation underscores the importance of the timely resolution of
differences within the international community on peaceful uses of nuclear energy issues.
The steady increase in the growth of non-power nuclear applications and their contribution to
Sustainable Development Goals as well as the quality of life around the world adds to the
significance of these issues.
As an embarking country, developing its own nuclear power programme, peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and its applications have priority for Turkey.
We remain committed to contributing to the responsible development of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy under the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions. This is
1

essential to maintaining the balance between rights and obligations of States Parties under the
Treaty and constitutes an integral element of the NPT’s grand bargain.
The relationship between peaceful uses and nuclear security is crucial. We must be mindful
not to draw a negative correlation between the two. While security measures should not
hamper the use of peaceful applications, it cannot be ignored that physical and other means of
security are vital to protect the people we are trying to serve from malicious acts.
Turkey is of the view that, nuclear safety and security are both responsibilities of the state.
We also believe that these fundamental elements of a nuclear programme have global
ramifications for peaceful nuclear use.
A more appropriate balance is needed between national and international interests and
responsibilities. This should include increased focus on the development of and adherence to
international standards, as well as greater transparency and accountability.
An essential component of peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the NPT is the commitment
to international cooperation.
In this regard, Turkey stresses the key role played by the IAEA by providing technical
assistance to states in all aspects of peaceful use. The IAEA, through its system of safeguards,
also provides confidence to states by enabling them to cooperate in the peaceful use of
nuclear energy without contributing to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Turkey acknowledges that the development of an appropriate infrastructure to support the
safe, secure and efficient use of nuclear power, in line with relevant IAEA standards and
guidelines, is a matter of central importance, especially for States that are planning for the
introduction of nuclear power to their energy mix.
Turkey attaches utmost importance to the Agency’s safety standards and carefully follows
Agency recommendations to obtain an advanced level of safety and security in its nuclear
power programme. We utilize the Agency’s support services in appropriate phases of our
nuclear programme both from regulator and utility aspects. We also draw upon relevant
international legal instruments in this field.
In addition to peer review missions, the Technical Cooperation Program (TCP) is the most
direct and tangible service of the Agency, geared towards introducing and improving
peaceful uses worldwide.
Turkey is of the view that the Agency has to be given the necessary financial resources in
order to effectively discharge its responsibilities.
Thank you.

2

