Check Against Delivery
Statement by UAE
NPT RevCon ….. 2017 - Cluster 3- General Issues
Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad Al Kaabi,
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the IAEA
Mr. Chairman ,
UAE recognizes the right of every State party to the NPT to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy and as a means of addressing climate change and
energy security concerns. We emphasize the importance of increased
accessibility and broader application of nuclear technology in fields such
as human health, agriculture, water management and industrial
applications.
UAE of the view that nuclear power programmes should be developed in a fully
transparent way , abiding by the highest standards of nuclear safety, security
and non proliferation .
My delegation stresses the importance of a robust international cooperation
to facilitate transfer of peaceful nuclear technology and material , and to
strengthen nuclear safety and security . IAEA is placed at a central Role at this
international framework to support member states in the development of
peaceful uses in a safe and responsible manner.
we place great emphasis on nuclear safety . My country commends the IAEA
on-going efforts in the area of nuclear safety . We support on-going evaluation
and updating of IAEA safety standards to take into consideration lessons
learned .
I note here the importance of the international instruments in the area of
nuclear safety, security, non proliferation and liability . We encourage all
States that have not yet done so to become party to these instruments. The
Convention on Nuclear Safety, is an important one , especially for states with
significant nuclear activities . We call here on Iran to join the CNS , Iran is the
only country with significant nuclear activities who is not party to this very
important convention.

My country recognizes the threat posed by the existence of any unsecured
nuclear material and facilities as well as the threat of nuclear terrorism . UAE
supports IAEA role in the area of nuclear security
In the scope of civil liability for nuclear damage, my country recognizes the
importance of establishing a national liability framework, and the development
of harmonized international liability regime.
An increased number of states expressed interest in developing peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. The Review Conference should continue to address issues
related to promotion of responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, strengthening nuclear safety and the development of sustainable
arrangements of assistance to newcomer countries in the nuclear energy field.
We look forward to constructive deliberations in this committee

Thank You.

