YtUMAhlhll Wlfr5tON U i I h t

L.JiL14

Ilhiiil) 4RAh FMIitAif5

f

-

L.&.dt@&l~!~Lp3

rv rri ~ ~ ~ T ~ R ~ A I ~arc>&+
O N Ar
L L N ~ K G -,S L ~ L N C Y

+,rf(

~ r ~ . d
~ U
_ i y
* j

Lr.ir

V I ~ ~ N A

LJ~-I,PJ~

Intervention by UAE
NPT PrepCom May 9th2012

-

Cluster 3- General Issues

Delivered by H.E. Ambassador Hamad A1 Kaabi,
Permanent Representative of the UAE to the lAEA

Mr. Chairman,
UAE continues to make significant progress towards the development of
its peacefbl nuclear energy program in accordance with the highest standards of
nuclear safety , security and non-proliferation. We are of the view that nuclear
energy will continue to play a major role in the global energy sector.
The Accident of Fukushima has brought the issue of nuclear safety
back to the discussion at the highest political levels. UAE is committed to
the implementation of IAEA nuclear safety plan, and has already taken steps
towards this goal. We have successfully concluded INlR and IRRS missions in
eJ 4 Gq
201 0 and 201 1 respectively.
My delegation believes that the IAEA has a centrapieading role in
harmonizing Member States' actions v A + e g t d to enhance nuclear safety, and
acknowledge with appreciation all concrete steps taken by the IAEA so far for
this purpose, specifically, those aimed at promoting peer review services and
strengthening safety standards.
All member states should work closely and with the IAEA in drawing
the right lessons from Fukushima and implementing the adopted IAEA
Nuclear Safety Action Plan. I also note here the importance of the international
instruments in the area of nuclear safety, such as the Convention of Nuclear
Safety. We encourage all States that have not yet done so to become party to the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, especially those states with significant nuclear
facilities.
The accident in Fukushima has also brought further attention to the issue of
nuclear liability and the importance of having in place effective and coherent
nuclear liability mechanisms, The NPT review process should address nuclear
liability issue and aim to highlight the importance of harmonized and efficient
nuclear liability frameworks.

The IAEA has a central and crucial role to play in the development of
multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including development of
mechanisms for assurance of nuclear fuel supply, as well as multilateral schemes
dealing with the back-end of the fuel cycle. These mechanisms are designed to
support the+P#dexpansion
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We welcome the
+ir " S i
the establishment of the IAEA fuel back and encourage fbrther
steps taken
efforts in this area. The UAE has pledged USD 10 million to the establishment
of the IAEA Fuel bank.

Mr Chairman,
An increased number of states expressed interest in developing peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. The preparatory committees and the review conference should
continue to address issues related to promotion of responsible development
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, strengthening nuclear safety and the
development of sustainable arrangements of assistance to new comer countries
in the nuclear energy field.

