UNITED KINGDOM

Second Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons: Geneva, 22 April – 3 May 2013.
Cluster III – Peaceful Uses

Statement
By

Ambassador Jo Adamson

UK Permanent Representative to the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva

2013 Preparatory Committee for the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

Geneva, 30 April 2013

Check against delivery

Second Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review Conference of the Treaty
on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: Geneva, 22 April – 3 May 2013.
Cluster III – Peaceful Uses
Statement by the United Kingdom
Mr Chairman,
1. My delegation fully supports the statement made by the distinguished
Ambassador of Ireland on behalf of the European Union. I should like, in addition, to
highlight one or two key issues relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
2. It is now over two years since the world witnessed the dreadful aftermath of the
seismic events that occurred off the coast of Japan and the subsequent accident at
Fukushima. This accident has focused global attention on the role that nuclear
energy can, and should, play in meeting intense and expanding energy needs
around the world. While decisions on whether to adopt, or to continue with, nuclear
energy are for individual States, many countries are clear that nuclear energy will
play a central role in balancing the need for energy security with objectives to
mitigate climate change: in short, a safe, secure, and reliable supply of low-carbon
energy. The UK, for its part, is committed to the promotion of safe nuclear energy by
those who wish to use it – in line with Article IV rights. Indeed our own ambitious
programme of nuclear new-build, based on the principle of no government subsidy,
is testament to that commitment.
3. Of course, a commitment to nuclear energy comes with responsibilities. Recalling
Action 59 of the Outcome Document of the 2010 Review Conference, for example,
signatories are urged to consider becoming party to the various Conventions relating
to nuclear safety, management of nuclear material, and nuclear accident procedures.
These are crucial: moreover we commend the leadership of the IAEA in coordinating
and implementing the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, and the Agency’s work in
hosting the Nuclear Security Conference in July. The UK is proud of its support to
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and will provide three million pounds to the Fund
this year as part of its ongoing contributions. We urge other States who are able to
provide contributions to do so. We also commend global efforts to minimise High
Enriched Uranium, and replace its use in research reactors with Low Enriched
Uranium wherever possible – Action 61 of the RevCon Action Plan. In this regard the
UK is taking steps to defuel its last HEU-fuelled research reactor by early 2014.
Check against delivery

4. The UK is also strongly committed to an effective and efficient safeguards regime,
both in terms of promoting the best possible regulatory framework and making best
use of limited safeguards resources. We fully support, and encourage, the IAEA in its
efforts to introduce the State Level Concept – a system that uses all safeguardsrelevant information about a State to draw up a State-level Safeguards Approach for
the State. We look to this development– of differentiation without discrimination – to
help take objective State factors into account in the planning, implementation and
evaluation of safeguards. We are also pleased to have been able to provide five
hundred thousand Euros this year towards the new Nuclear Materials Laboratory of
the IAEA.
5. Aside from nuclear power, effective safety, security and safeguards procedures
also underpin the safe and assured use of small scale nuclear techniques,
contributing markedly to a better quality of life in nearly every country. Wider use of
nuclear applications, including those for medical diagnosis and treatment: crop
protection, and understanding climate change better, is recognised as a major
potential contribution to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
Mr Chairman,
6. Perhaps a theme running through the peaceful uses actions from the 2010 Review
Conference is that of cooperation and partnership. No one country has ever
realistically had all the necessary resources – human or material – or expertise or
experience, to adequately and safely research, develop, and utilise nuclear energy
for its own benefit, in line with the rights expressed in Article IV of the NPT. This will
remain the case. Cooperation, at the scientific, technical, policy, and operational
levels, will become even more important as resources become more stretched and
we need to learn more from each other. So the frameworks for participating in the
fullest possible exchanges of equipment, materials, and scientific and technological
information – as urged in Action 48 - are fundamental. Based on our experience in
the successful operation of nuclear facilities since the mid 1950s, the UK takes pride
in its record as a partner on nuclear technology and skills. We continue to promote
formal and informal cooperation agreements with others, and have concluded two –
with Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates - since the Review Conference.
7. In this theme of cooperation the UK also strongly supports efforts to develop
multinational approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle – steps under Action 58. By
removing or reducing, for example, the risks of interruption to fuel supply, or
Check against delivery

removing the potential costs of unnecessary fuel cycle facilities, such measures can
assist those States who seek to introduce or expand a nuclear power programme.
Multinational approaches can also help reinforce international standards of safety
and security. Moreover they pose no burden or impact on those States who do not
wish to pursue nuclear energy or use them. The UK commends steps taken to date,
and looks forward to further progress and ideas in this area, possibly covering
regional possibilities, and different parts of the fuel cycle.
Mr Chairman,
8. In conclusion, the UK notes that the role of peaceful uses of nuclear energy can
only intensify. The world seeks ever more energy, reliably and sustainably, and looks
to nuclear technology to play an increasing role in securing better quality and
duration of life for so many more people. In consequence, the role of the NPT – to
help the world take advantage of what nuclear technologies have to offer in a safe,
secure, and sustainable fashion – becomes ever more important. The United
Kingdom is fully committed to the NPT and to the 2010 Action Plan. In this regard we
strongly support the work of the IAEA, and look to the future as a committed global
partner across the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
9. Finally Mr Chairman, as a State that is actively pursuing nuclear energy as part of
its overall energy strategy, we warmly invite delegates to an event, to be held in
Room XI tomorrow, Wednesday the first of May, at 1.15pm, that will present the UK’s
experience of undertaking a path towards nuclear new build; in short the issues of a
modern nuclear programme, and how we are tackling them, with the opportunity to
pose questions to those involved. All are welcome.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Check against delivery

