UNITED KINGDOM

First Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons: Vienna, 30 April – 11 May 2012.
Cluster III – Peaceful Uses
Statement
By

Ambassador Jo Adamson

UK Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament

Head of the United Kingdom Delegation
at the
2012 Preparatory Committee for the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

Vienna, 9 May 2012
Check against delivery

First Preparatory Committee of the 2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: Vienna, 30 April – 11 May 2012.
Cluster III – Peaceful Uses
Statement by the United Kingdom
Mr Chairman,
1. My delegation fully supports the statement made by the EU External Action
Service on behalf of the European Union. I should like to highlight one or two key
issues relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
2. Firstly, the United Kingdom, like many States, continues to recognise the potential
of nuclear energy to help meet the growing global need for low-carbon energy. Such
demands are intense: a doubling of global electricity demand is anticipated by the
year 2050. Indeed one outcome of the accident at Fukushima that followed the tragic
seismic events off Japan last year has been a more open and transparent debate,
worldwide, on matters of energy security. While it was right that there was
overwhelming international commitment to examining, and acting on, the lessons
from Fukushima, the implementation of Article IV rights on peaceful uses will be
even more important. We are committed to promoting promote the safe expansion of
nuclear energy for those States who choose to use it.
3. The agreement to an Action Plan, reached at the 2010 RevCon, was a remarkable
milestone, not least regarding peaceful uses. Action 59, for example, urging
signatories to consider becoming party to the various Conventions relating to nuclear
safety, management of nuclear material, and nuclear accident procedures, was
particularly prescient. On the question of nuclear security, the recent Summit in
Seoul has reaffirmed the ambitious goal to secure all vulnerable nuclear material
within four years. The UK fully supports this. We are a major contributor to the IAEA
Nuclear Security Fund, with £8m either given or pledged since 2010, and we urge
other States able to provide such contributions to do so.
4. On verification, we fully support, and further encourage, the IAEA in its efforts to
introduce the State Level concept and a safeguards system that is fully information
driven. This can take account of the possibilities opened up by full application of new
and existing technology, along with more remote and continuous monitoring. In
short, it will enable State factors to be taken into account – differentiation without
discrimination – making best use of limited safeguards resources. In this regard we

Check against delivery

are pleased to have been able to provide £500k this year towards improvements at
the ECAS safeguards laboratory of the IAEA.
5. Since the 2010 Review Conference, there has also been considerable progress
on multinational approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle – the steps under Action 58.
Such mechanisms can build confidence in the reliable supply of nuclear fuel, either
by reducing or removing the risks of interruption to supply, or by reducing the
potential costs of duplicating fuel cycle facilities. They therefore help take forward the
intentions of those States who seek to introduce or expand a nuclear power
programme. They also help reinforce international standards of safety and security.
In this regard the UK commends the work of the IAEA and individual States in
bringing proposals for two LEU banks to the IAEA Board for approval and looks
forward to further progress on the IAEA LEU bank. The UK was also pleased to bring
its own proposal for a Nuclear Fuel Assurance – a State level agreement
underpinning a commercial contract – to the Agency Board, in March 2011. Perhaps
most importantly, such multilateral approaches do not represent a cost to, or impact
on, those States who choose not to pursue nuclear energy or make use of these
measures.
Mr Chairman,
6. In conclusion, there is clearly strong evidence of important progress since 2010.
This is vital: nuclear energy and nuclear technologies will play a stronger role in our
increasingly energy-intensive and technology-hungry world. The framework provided
by the NPT will correspondingly become more important and more visible as,
globally, we seek to ensure that that expansion is safe, secure, and viable. The
United Kingdom takes its commitments to the NPT in general and to the 2010 Action
Plan very seriously indeed. We fully support the work of the IAEA, and remain
committed to strong and open cooperation on all aspects of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

Check against delivery

