2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons: New York, 27 April – 22 May 2015
Main Committee III
Statement by the United Kingdom

My delegation fully supports the statement made by the representative of the
European Union. In addition, I should like to highlight a number of key issues relating
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in a national capacity.

The UK recognises the inalienable right of all Parties to research, develop, and
utilise civil nuclear energy for their own benefit, in line with the rights expressed in
Article IV of the NPT and on the condition that they are in full compliance with nonproliferation obligations. This is one of the fundamental aspects of the NPT that all
States Parties have agreed to, and access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is
part of the ‘grand bargain’ inherent in the NPT. We are proud of our record of
successful operation of nuclear facilities since the mid-1950s, and of being a partner
of choice on nuclear technology and skills to those Parties wishing to develop civil
nuclear power in a safe and secure manner. Cooperation at the scientific, technical,
policy, and operational levels will become even more to ensure we continue to learn
from each other and sustain capacity in nuclear knowledge management.

The United Kingdom, like many States, continues to recognise the potential of civil
nuclear energy to help meet the growing global need for low-carbon energy in order
to meet climate change goals through reduced carbon emissions. Security of supply
is also a key concern for many States and civil nuclear energy can play a very
important role alongside other forms of energy generation to ensure a secure,
reliable and consistent energy supply. We are committed to promoting the safe
expansion of civil nuclear energy for those States who choose to use it. As many of
you will be aware, the UK has a programme of new build civil nuclear power stations
which will help us meet the aim of a secure, low-carbon energy mix.

The UK is a strong supporter of the IAEA and its Technical Cooperation (TC)
Programme. We ensure that we pay our financial contribution on time and in full on
an annual basis and encourage others to do likewise. We recognise the very
Check against delivery

important work that the Programme does, not least in the contribution it makes to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. The TC Programme provides
the necessary support to allow countries to use nuclear techniques in a safe and
effective way; and the impact that the Programme has had should not be
underestimated. There are numerous examples which could be used to
demonstrate this, especially in the fields of medical diagnosis & treatment and crop
protection. We have also recently contributed funds towards the modernisation of
the Agency’s Seibersdorf laboratories through the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI).

The UK is very encouraged by the work done by the Agency to move to a resultsbased management approach. We believe that the TC Programme needs to support
the right projects – the means by which these are chosen should be clear, the
projects should be realistic and the benefits achievable. The projects should be run
effectively and carefully monitored to ensure that the overall project aim provides a
focus throughout the lifetime of the project. It is also important that, wherever
possible, the benefits are ongoing so that the project continues to deliver and makes
a real difference, rather than achieving short-term changes which cannot be
sustained. Each project should be comprehensively evaluated so that lessons can
be learnt and applied to future projects. Continuous, iterative, improvements will
ensure that the TC Programme remains relevant and well supported.

Nuclear technology will increasingly play a role in securing a better quality and
duration of life for more people. The NPT has a vital role to play in ensuring that the
world can take advantage of what nuclear technologies have to offer in a safe,
secure, and sustainable way. The agreement of an Action Plan, reached at the 2010
RevCon, was a remarkable milestone and gave a clear framework of deliverables in
order to progress the fundamental objectives of the NPT. The actions relating to
peaceful uses are still relevant today, despite being agreed five years ago.

The UK has made several fundamental changes to its nuclear regulatory regime
since the last Review Conference that will be of interest to colleagues in the room.
We recognise how important an independent and robust regime is and are
committed to creating the highest standards of nuclear regulation. To that end, we
have embarked on steps to enhance the UK’s civil nuclear regulatory framework, to
Check against delivery

ensure it remains world class and has the flexibility to be able to address future
challenges. The Energy Act, which gained Royal Assent in December 2013,
included provisions to establish the Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR, created in
2011) as a statutory, independent regulator. The ONR brings together the functions
of civil nuclear safety, security, safeguards implementation, radioactive materials
transport, and conventional health & safety on civil nuclear sites. The ONR began
operating as a statutory body on 1 April 2014.

Since the 2010 Review Conference, there has also been progress on multinational
approaches (MNA) to the nuclear fuel cycle – the steps under Action 58. The UK
fully supports moves to create a menu of viable and credible assurances of fuel
supply, which would enable a new nuclear state to avoid the need to develop
expensive and complex indigenous enrichment technologies. The UK views all MNA
proposals as complementary, and hopes that states are able to select proposals
which contribute best to their energy mix, noting that they pose no burden or impact
on those States who do not wish to pursue nuclear energy or use them.
The United Kingdom’s Nuclear Fuel Assurance proposal – a response to the IAEA’s
request for Multilateral Nuclear Approaches (MNAs), was adopted at the IAEA Board
of Governors in March 2011.

The UK is a strong supporter of co-ordinated international effort in seeking the
continuous improvement of nuclear safety and security. We are a Contracting Party
to relevant international nuclear safety instruments such as the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safe Management of Spent Fuel and
Radioactive Waste; in addition to the Paris Convention on nuclear third party liability
and the Brussels Supplementary Convention since the 1960s. The UK has also
ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and
its 2005 Amendment. We encourage other Parties to sign and ratify all instruments
relevant to safety and security as soon as possible.

As a State that is actively pursuing nuclear energy as part of its overall energy
strategy, we warmly invite delegates to an event, to be held in Room CR-D on
Monday 11 May from 1315 to 1430. We will present the strategy and vision that the
UK has for our civil nuclear industry and talk about the breadth of activities that we
Check against delivery

are undertaking as we develop our new build programme. This includes the role of
Government and the Regulator, the key part that an effective supply chain has to
play, the importance of developing the right skills for the workforce, and the resultant
decommissioning and waste management which needs to take place for any civil
nuclear programme to be effective and implemented in the right way. We will also
cover the contribution which academia and R&D has to make. All are welcome.

We hope that States Parties at this RevCon will agree a set of principles to frame
any potential withdrawal from the NPT under Article X. While we recognise the right
of any State to withdraw from the Treaty in extreme circumstances, we believe all
states have a shared interest in ensuring that our collective right to global security is
not undermined. The UK has funded a series of events hosted by the International
Network of Emerging Nuclear Specialists to discuss this issue, with the hope of
building consensus on how to take this forward. We look forward to a genuine
debate on this issue and hope we will be able to agree clearly and robust language.

We continue to believe that strengthening the Review Process for the Treaty, as set
out in 1995, is an important element of our collective work, and we look forward to
further discussion on this issue during this RevCon.

Mr Chairman,

In conclusion, the UK notes that the role of peaceful uses of nuclear energy can only
become more important. The world will continue to need ever increasing amounts of
energy, and this needs to be produced and delivered in a safe, reliable and
sustainable way. This energy needs to be cost-effective and low carbon.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Check against delivery

