2018 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Treaty on
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018

Pillar Ill

Statement by the United Kingdom

Mr Chairman

The United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union. In a national capacity, I would also like to
highlight several key issues relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

The UK has long been an advocate for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as we
have reiterated in previous Preparatory Committee meetings, and we will continue to
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy . The development of civil nuclear
energy must be accomplished without compromising safety, security or nonproliferation, and in accordance with safeguards. In line with the rights expressed in
Article IV of the NPT, and on the condition that any countries doing so are in full
compliance with their non-proliferation obligations, we recognise the inalienable right
of all Parties to research, develop, and utilise civil nuclear energy for their own
benefit.

Civil nuclear new build programme

In November 2017, the UK Government launched its ambitious industrial strategy,
which sets out a long term plan to boost the productivity and earning power of people
throughout the UK. Furthermore, it details how we will help businesses create
better, higher-paying jobs in every part of the UK with investment in the skills,
industries and infrastructure of the future.

Check against delivery

One of the four Grand Challenges identified in the Industrial Strategy is clean growth.
The United Kingdom has put clean growth at the heart of its Industrial Strategy to
increase productivity, boost people's earning power and ensure the UK continues to
lead the world in efforts to tackle climate change, including through the decisions
taken on new nuclear. Industry has set out proposals via three consortia to develop
1SGW of new nuclear power at six sites in the UK. In addition, two reactor designs
have now completed the Generic Design Assessment process, and another is in the
early stages.

The UK is committed to ensuring that there is a skilled workforce in place that can
deliver the new nuclear programme to time and to budget without compromising the
effective continuation of current operations and decommissioning.

The Nuclear Skills Strategy Group (NSSG) is an industry-led group, formed in 2015,
that brings together government, industry, regulators and the unions to address skills
challenges facing the sector. In December 2016 the NSSG published its strategic
plan aimed at securing the required supply of suitably qualified and competent
personnel for the UK nuclear sector.

Nuclear safety and security

The UK proactively participated in the 7th Review meeting of the Convention on
Nuclear Safety in May 2017. Through the peer review process, the UK's Country
Group commended the UK's integration of nuclear safety and security, and supply
chain management alongside work on talent management and undergraduate/
graduate programs as areas of "good performance". The UK continues to
encourage states to become party to the various nuclear safety conventions.

The UK's security regime for the civil nuclear industry is robust and effective and
fully meets international standards. Revised guidance was issued to the industry by
the UK's nuclear regulator in March 2017. The Security Assessment Principles
provide the essential foundation for the introduction of outcome focussed regulation
for all constituent security disciplines: physical, personnel, transport, and cyber
security and information assurance.
Check against delivery

The UK civil nuclear sector is now in the process of producing site security plans and
transport security statements that are consistent with these revised requirements.

International Atomic Energy Agency

No statement on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would be complete without
mentioning the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the important work that it
does with regards to safeguards, and the Technical Cooperation Programme.
Indeed, when we look at the NPT Action Plan agreed in 2010, there are a large
number of actions that relate directly to the work of the IAEA.

The United Kingdom continues to provide full support to the IAEA. We acknowledge
how important it is that the IAEA has certainty of funding and so we pay our Regular
Budget and Technical Cooperation Fund contributions in full and on-time. The UK
has also made significant extra-budgetary contributions to support the refurbishment
of the Seibersdorf laboratories, and in support of the IAEA's nuclear safety and
security programmes which underpin the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. We
have also made a £4.1 M contribution to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund. We
encourage all states parties to fulfil their financial commitments to the IAEA so that
they continue with their important work.

The UK works with the IAEA and other Member States to encourage fair balance
and effective governance in the Technical Cooperation Programme, in order that
developing and 'least developed' countries are best able to benefit from the available
funding.

The UK also regularly contributes subject matter expertise and technical assistance
to further the development and sustainability of peaceful uses of nuclear technology,
including through contributing to the drafting of IAEA standards and guidance, and
by participating in peer review missions to other Member States.

Mr Chairman,

Check against delivery

In conclusion, the UK would like to reaffirm our support to the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the work that it does, and to reiterate the importance that
peaceful uses of nuclear energy plays in the world.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

Check against delivery

