Check against delivery

69

STATEMENT
by H.E. Ambassador Yurii KL YMENKO,
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations Office and other
International Organizations in Geneva
Cluster 3 issues
(May 2, 2018, Geneva)

Mr Chairman,

While aligning with the statement of the European Union delivered earlier,
I would like to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
The Article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
recognizes the inalienable right of the parties to the Treaty to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without .discrimination
and in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT. We would like to underline
that nothing in the Treaty should be interpreted as affecting this right.
Ukraine underscores the importance of peaceful nuclear technology for
sustainable socio-economic development of nations, provided that nuclear
activities of states are subject to the full scope of IAEA safeguards.
In this regard, we reiterate our strong support for the Agency's Technical
Cooperation Programme (TCP), which plays an important role in the development
of application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and · serves as a powerful
tool for exchange of nuclear knowledge and capacity building in member states.
We are of the opinion that for the recent year the TC Programme has made a
big step forward in terms of size, comprehensiveness and complexity of enlarging
the input of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the wodd.
The IAEA regional and . national technical cooperation projects have
significantly contributed to nuclear safety and improving an overall effectiveness
of peaceful use of nuclear energy in Ukraine.
Against this backdrop and proceeding from interests of Ukraine as a part of
European · region, we expect that nuclear safety, nuclear medicine,
decommissioning, radioactive waste management and nuclear security will
constitute priority thematic areas for the IAEA technical cooperation for 2018 and
the nearest future.
Ukraine stands ready to actively cooperate with the Agency on Chomobyl
related issues for the TCP project cycle for 2018 - 2019 by further implementing, ·
inter alia, a national project aimed at supporting Chomobyl NPP Units
Decommissioning and Radioactive Waste Management at the NPP site and within
the Exclusion Zone.

Since 2001, the IAEA, through the implementation of national and regional
technical cooperation projects, has been supporting the Government of Ukraine in
this critical for the Chomobyl NPP area .
Within the implementation of the projects from 2001 to 2017 , more than 80
missions of expert and technical support were carried out, more than 60 workshops
and scientific visits of the Chomobyl NPP specialists were organized to the sites of ·
the facilities where the tasks, critical for the Chornobyl Nuclear Power Plant, were
successfully solved.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear power will remain an important option to achieve energy security
and Sustainable Development Goals in the 21st century. Ukraine supports
countries' decisions to develop or further expand civil nuclear power programs. In
our view the main prerequisite for the peaceful use .of the nuclear energy is the
state 's commitment to non-proliferation regime and to the highest standards of
nuclear safety and security.
In this regard I cannot but mention very useful and significant input into
relevant international cooperation by the Korea Institute of Nuclear
Nonproliferation and Control as well as the Japan Atomic Energy Agency.
As the responsibility for nuclear security rests with individual state, Ukraine
wishes to underline that all nuclear facilities of Ukraine are operating in a regular
mode. For the past three years additional effective measures were undertaken by
the competent authorities of Ukraine to ensure their nuclear security, including
reinforced physical protection of 15 power units in operation at 4 sites of the
Ukrainian NPPs.
At present, we can confirm the high level of nuclear safety and nuclear
security at the Ukrainian NPPs, where nuclear materials are stored and used.
To conclude, Mr Chairman, let me reiterate the importance of responsible
development of peaceful ·nuclear technology, with due regard of safety, security,
and non-proliferation conditions, as well as the significance of further IAEA
financial and technical assistance to effectively cope with nuclear security
challenges.
I thank you.

