Past Review Conferences have focused considerable attention on the question of whether States Parties were doing as much as they could to facilitate the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as called for in Article IV, This Conference, like its predecessors, should address that question, and the United States looks forward to engaging in a fruitful discussion of that topic. However, given the crisis of noncompliance now confronting the NPT and the spurious claims by certain states that other states are wrongfully seeking to halt their legitimate nuclear programs or access to certain nuclear-related technologies, this Conference must address in depth all aspects of Article [V.
As we all know, Article IV of the NPT contains two very important provisions. The first provision, contained in Paragraph 1 of Article IV provides that "nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right1' of States Parties to pursue the use nuclear energy "for peaceful purposes'1 and "in conformity with articles I and II of the Treaty." Thus, States Parties to the Treaty accept the condition that their nuclear activities must comply with Articles I and II of the Treaty. The second provision is Paragraph 2 of Article IV, and it calls upon all parties to the treaty to facilitate the "fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information" on peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Clearly, any right to receive benefits under Article IV also is conditioned on the fulfillment of the Treaty's nonproliferation obligations.
But the language of Article IV speaks to more than just access to benefits; it also places specific responsibilities upon suppliers. As the United States has pointed out in its statement in Main Committee I regarding Articles I and II, Article I requires the nuclear-weapon States not in any way to assist, encourage or induce any non-nuclear-weapon State to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other explosive devices. To fulfill these obligations, the nuclear-weapon States must establish and implement comprehensive and effective export controls. They also should halt nuclear assistance to violators of Article II. Moreover, through appropriate measures, they should seek to halt the use of nuclear material and equipment, acquired or produced by an NPT state as a result of a material violation of the NPT's nonproliferation undertakings, and require the elimination or return of those items to the original supplier.
Article II requires the non-nuclear-weapon States not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices and not to seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other explosive nuclear devices. As the United States outlined in its Main Committee I statement, fulfillment of this obligation requires that non- nuclear-weapon States refrain from activities designed to develop a nuclear weapons capability. Further, they should provide transparency into their activities sufficient to demonstrate their peaceful intent, and have in place the necessary laws and regulations to enforce their Article II obligations. There are a number of counter-indicators to peaceful intent that other state s should consider to be warning signs of a nuclear weapons purpose - and hence of a possible Article II violation. They include the presence of undeclared nuclear facilities, procurement patterns inconsistent with a civil nuclear program (e.g., clandestine procurement networks, possibly including the use of front companies and fraudulent documentation); security measures beyond what would be appropriate for peaceful, civil nuclear installations: a pattern of Article III safeguards violations suggestive not of mere mistake but of willful violation, and/or systematic deception and denial efforts aimed at concealing nuclear activities from the IAEA; and a nuclear program that has little coherence for peaceful purposes but great coherence for weapons purposes. Such danger signals are relevant for all States Parties, all of whom should have an interest in strict compliance with the NPT. They hold additional relevance for supplier countries, which should take steps to verify the intent of their potential clients so that they do not place themselves in jeopardy of an Article I violation and/or of actions that are contrary to the NPT's core nonproliferation and security purposes.
Some States Parties have argued that Paragraph 1 of Article IV provides an unconditional right to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes - and that steps by other states to deny them that right somehow violates their NPT rights. Nothing could be further from the truth: by agreeing to the NPT, countries have agreed that their nuclear activities must be in "conformity with articles I and IF' (as well as with Article III). Article IV does not provide States Parties that have violated the nonproliferation provisions of the Treaty any protection from the consequences of breach, including the imposition of measures by other states, jointly or separately, against their nuclear programs - and States Parties who so claim are guilty of treaty revisionism.
Let me now turn to Paragraph 2 of Article IV. Paragraph 2 of Article IV calls on parties "to facilitate ... the fullest possible exchange" of technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The use of the term "fullest possible" is an acknowledgement that cooperation may be limited. Parties are not compelled by Article IV to engage in nuclear cooperation with any given state - or to provide any particular form of nuclear assistance to any other state. The NPT does not require any specific sharing of nuclear technology between particular States Parties, nor does it oblige technology- possessors to share any specific materials or technology with non- possessors. Indeed, to conform both to the overall objective of the NPT - strengthening security by halting nuclear proliferation - and to any Article 1 and III obligations, supplier states must consider whether certain types of assistance or assistance to certain countries are consistent with the nonproliferation purposes and obligations of the NPT, other international obligations and their national requirements. They should withhold assistance if they believe that a specific form of cooperation would encourage or facilitate proliferation, or if they believe that a state is pursuing a nuclear weapons program, is not in full compliance with its safeguards obligations, or is in violation of Articles I or II.
Let me underscore the U.S. view; NPT parties have the responsibility to implement Article IV in such a way that not only preserves NPT compliant parties' right to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy, but also ensures against abuse of this right by States Parties pursuing nuclear weapons capabilities. Thus, nonproliferation efforts such as export control restrictions, Nuclear Suppliers Group supply guidelines, end-use restrictions, interdiction measures such as the Proliferation Security Initiative, the imposition of national or international sanctions in response to nuclear- related proliferation problems, and efforts to restrict the spread of proliferation-sensitive enrichment and reprocessing technology are in no way inconsistent with Article IV.
Some have asserted that a State Party in demonstrable compliance with the NPT has a specific right to develop the full nuclear fuel cycle, and that efforts to restrict access to the relevant technologies is inconsistent with the NPT. The Treaty is silent on the issue of whether compliant states have the right to develop the full nuclear fuel cycle, but as I have noted, it does provide for discretion on the pan of supplier states regarding the nature of their cooperation with other states. Paragraph 2 of Article IV speaks to the "fullest possible exchange" and sharing in the development of applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Further, the Preamble to the NPT affirms the general "principle that the benefits of peaceful applications of
nuclear technology ... should be available for peaceful purposes to all Parties." While compliant State Parties should be able to avail themselves of the benefits that the peaceful use of nuclear energy has brought to mankind, the Treaty establishes no right to receive any particular nuclear technology from other States Parties - and most particularly, no right to receive technologies that pose a significant proliferation risk.
Further, we dare not lose sight of the fact that during the past two decades, several states, including Iran, Iraq, Libya and North Korea, have sought enrichment and/or reprocessing capabilities to support efforts to develop nuclear weapons in violation of the NPT. This reality leads to the inevitable conclusion that states parties should, in the interests of furthering the nonproliferation and security goals of the NPT, undertake steps to limit the spread of enrichment and reprocessing capabilities.
In order to account for this new reality, my President has proposed that we should agree to limit transfers of enrichment and reprocessing equipment and technologies to those NPT compliant states that currently already possess full-scale, functioning enrichment and reprocessing plants. States that are in compliance with their Article II and Article III obligations and forego enrichment and reprocessing would have reliable access at reasonable cost to fuel for their civilian nuclear reactors. This approach would prevent states such as Iran from using a purportedly peaceful nuclear program as cover to pursue fissile material for nuclear weapons, while ensuring that the benefits of nuclear energy would be available for compliant NPT States Parties. It would put into place a new standard that will help prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons while ensuring that sufficient capacity is retained to provide fuel cycle services to all NPT parties.
Let me underscore, NPT states that are in full compliance with their Article II and Article III obligations would not be adversely affected in any way. They would face no real or imagined discrimination. Indeed, more than 170 NPT parties already have decided that enrichment and reprocessing technologies are costly and unnecessary. Under the U.S. proposal, these and other compliant States Parties would benefit from assured access to nuclear fuel at reasonable prices and, above all, from greater assurance that other states are not developing nuclear capabilities for weapons purposes.
Mr. Chairman, the United States strongly supports the fullest possible exchange among NPT compliant States Parties and between NPT compliant
States Parties and the IAEA in the sphere of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and we will continue to provide such assistance to states that comply with their NPT and safeguards obligations. We are the largest financial contributor to the IAEA's Technical Cooperation program, measured both in terms of our statutory and voluntary contributions. We maintain, on a national basis, 21 agreements with individual countries and groups of countries that permit the export of reactors and fuel to 45 NPT parties. We also have a separate agreement that permits similar transfers to members of the IAEA that are prepared to meet U.S. legal and policy requirements for such cooperation. We are engaged in cooperative research and development projects with nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States, developed countries and developing countries. These cooperative projects will help address the nuclear power needs of the 21st century. Our nuclear cooperation also has supported important advances in medicine, agriculture and water management in over 100 countries. The additional statement that I am, in the interest of time, entering into the formal record of these proceedings as a written document, provides additional details on our strong support for peaceful cooperation. That statement also outlines our strong support for ensuring the safety and security of peaceful nuclear programs, including through the efforts of the IAEA, and provides additional detail on our approach to the problem posed by the proliferation of sensitive enrichment and reprocessing technologies.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the peaceful application of nuclear energy holds great promise for mankind. The United States will continue to contribute to its development throughout the world. But, today, we face a situation that is threatening to undermine our ability to implement Article IV in a way that contributes to the core objectives of the NPT. As we move forward in our consideration of Article IV, we urge all States Parties to remember that the nuclear activities of States Parties must comply with Articles I and II of the Treaty, and that by calling for the "fullest possible" cooperation in the field of nuclear energy, Article IV recognizes that achievement of the nonproliferation goals of the Treaty must be foremost. States not in compliance with Articles I, II or Article III should not receive Article IV benefits, including assistance in peaceful nuclear cooperation from other states or from the IAEA, and should instead become the focus of enforcement attention. Sound NPT implementation and enforcement - as well as sound nonproliferation policy - can and should entail reducing violators1 access to nuclear technology. Finally, sound NPT implementation and sound nonproliferation policy can and should close the loophole that has
allowed certain states to use a purportedly peaceful nuclear program as cover to pursue fissile material for nuclear weapons, while ensuring that the benefits of nuclear energy are available for compliant NPT States Parties.
Thank you Madam Chairwoman:
The United States delegation recognizes the importance of Article IV, especially at this particular time. Our first statement to this Committee focused on the linkage established in Article IV between compliance with the NPT's nonproliferation obligations and the benefits of peaceful nuclear cooperation. We appreciate the opportunity to present our views on the substantial record of U.S. support for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and also to address the safety and security of peaceful nuclear programs.
Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation
We believe that the substantial record of U.S. support for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy shows clearly the depth of our commitment to Article IV.
In 1970 when the NPT entered into force, there were 12 operating power reactors in states that would eventually join the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States (NNWS). Today there are 214 power reactors, and many of them were either supplied by the United States or were built using commercially-licensed U.S. technology. Historically, the United States has been the major exporter of enrichment services and fuel to the world's power reactors. Of the approximately 90 research reactors currently in operation in NPT NNWS today, about 60 were originally supplied by the United States and/or use fuel provided by the United States, The U.S. Nuclear Energy Institute estimates the value of annual nuclear commerce from the United States to other countries in the range of $1.2 billion.
In addition to our 21 agreements for nuclear cooperation that permit exports of fuel and reactors to 45 NPT parties, we have many other bilateral mechanisms in place that promote peaceful nuclear cooperation. The U.S. Department of Energy sister laboratory' agreements with nine NPT parties pair up nuclear research establishments to promote scientific exchanges and training, as well as collaborative projects. We are particularly proud of our joint committees on nuclear energy cooperation, which began with a U.S.-South Korea committee established in the mid 1970s. More recently, following their adherence to the NPT, we were pleased to begin similar collaboration with Argentina and Brazil, and hope to do so in the near future with South Africa. These joint committees meet once or twice a year and focus in great detail on both policy and technical questions relevant to civil nuclear applications.
Through the Technical Cooperation Program of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), we have supported nuclear cooperation in fields ranging from nuclear power to nuclear applications in human health, agriculture, hydrology, and other areas. In the period since the 2000 NPT Review Conference, we have provided nearly $100 million to support the Agency's technical cooperation activities, and these funds have been expended in nearly 100 developing countries.
Looking at where we are today, we see impressive results. Let's look at one example. In the area of human health, the IAEA in cooperation with the World Health Organization, has launched a new Program of Action for Cancer Therapy to raise public awareness and to assist Member States to analyze, develop, and implement appropriate cancer treatment programs, mainly by expanding fundraising efforts with non-traditional donors. By 2015, two-thirds of the cancer cases will be in the developing world. Yet, many developing countries lack the radiotherapy equipment and professional expertise necessary to fight the growing battle. Currently there are approximately 100 active technical cooperation projects involving radiotherapy. My government is pleased to provide seed money to support the Agency's program in this area, which we believe can provide benefits to millions of people worldwide. A broad range of peaceful nuclear cooperation activities pursued in conformity with NPT nonproliferation obligations can make a substantial constructive difference in the lives of people everywhere.
Safety and Security
Parties have long recognized that peaceful uses of nuclear energy must be safe and secure. The terrible Chernobyl accident in 1986 and the horrors of September 11, 2001 made that realization more acute. Collectively, the world knows that a significant accident or successful terrorist attack in one country could threaten the viability of peaceful nuclear uses worldwide and carry devastating economic, environmental, and health effects.
Ensuring the security and safety of peaceful nuclear programs requires a comprehensive approach involving all states. While nuclear safety and security remain a sovereign responsibility, the IAEA plays an important role in assisting states to strengthen their ability to ensure the safety and security of their programs. As of March 31, 2005, 26 Member States, the EU, and one non-governmental organization have pledged $38 million to the IAEA's Nuclear Security Fund in support of key program activities to combat nuclear terrorism. The United S:ates has contributed two-thirds of that total and remains centrally involved in the program's development.
We have taken a leading role at the IAEA to enhance safety and security standards. The United States is an active party to the Nuclear Safety Convention, the Joint Conventions on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, and the Convention for the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials (CPPNM) and actively supports the diplomatic process to strengthen key CPPNM provisions. We played a strong role in revising the IAEA Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, adopted by the IAEA Board and General Conference in 2003. The United States has, along with the G-8, lent strong political and economic support to ensure these standards are met.
We will continue to provide assistance in implementing the IAEA's revised Code of Conduct, because it strengthens vital norms and practices for radioactive source security, national tracking of sources, access and export controls, and export notifications. We welcome the new IAEA policy, adopted by the Board and General Conference in 2004, to accelerate its program to help countries establish regulatory controls for radioactive sources. We endorse this policy, wall commit financial and technical resources to it, and urge ethers to do the same.
The United States has recently launched, with the IAEA, the Global Threat Reduction Initiative. This multilateral program identifies, recovers, secures arid facilitates the disposition of high-risk nuclear and radioactive materials around the world that pose a threat to the international community. This initiative seeks to accelerate and expand existing threat reduction efforts, including repatriation of Russian and U.S.-origin research reactor fuel and conversion of civil research reactors worldwide to low enriched uranium fuel.
Nuclear Fuel Cycle
One of the most important issues that this Committee will discuss concerns the nuclear fuel cycle. Over the past two years, there have been a number of proposals by President Bush, the IAEA Director General and the UN High Level Panel to limit the spread of sensitive nuclear technologies that can provide access to weapons-usable nuclear material, specifically enrichment and reprocessing. These capabilities can be and have been misused by certain non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to support clandestine efforts to develop nuclear weapons in violation of their NPT commitments. In our earlier statement, the U.S. delegation outlined President Bush's proposal in this area, which would ensure reliable access to nuclear fuel at reasonable cost to NPT parties that comply with their obligations and forego such technologies. While there are many competitive sources of fuel supply at the current time, we would welcome more attention on ways to provide assurance of supply in nuclear fuel services at a reasonable cost so as to prevent the spread of enrichment and reprocessing facilities to additional countries.
The international community clearly recognizes the problem posed by proliferation of these sensitive technologies. Efforts to solve this problem are only beginning and will require much serious discussion. As these discussions continue within the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the G-8, the IAEA, and at this Review Conference - it is important to "keep our eye on the ball" - to use a colloquial U.S. expression. Any solution should make it more difficult for those NPT parties seeking nuclear weapons to acquire enrichment or reprocessing facilities, whether openly or secretly, while not impairing the ongoing genuinely peaceful nuclear programs of the vast majority of NPT parties. Clearly, however, any state not currently having enrichment or reprocessing facilities that elects to build such a facility must expect great scrutiny of that decision on economic and nonproliferation grounds. As we have established in other statements, Iran's decision clearly does not stand up to scrutiny on either basis.
Looking ahead, we want to build on the strong record of cooperation and efforts to enhance nuclear safety and security and prevent proliferation. We see considerable potential to enhance the contribution of nuclear technology and materials to the well being of our peoples and our planet, without placing us all at increased risk to nuclear terrorism or proliferation. Nuclear applications can improve many aspects of life, including medical care, sources of potable water, electricity generation, shelf life of food supplies, and health of livestock. We look forward to working with others to review the past as well as to define our shared goals for cooperation in the future. Working together, we can help to realize the full promise of the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes envisaged under the NPT, in full conformity with our nonproliferation obligations. We can thereby contribute to a better, more secure, life for our citizens now and for generations to come.
At this Conference as at prior review conferences, there has been widespread support for universal adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Obviously, we move away from achieving this goal if a party to the Treaty announces, as North Korea did in January 2003, its intention to withdraw from the NPT. In addition to the concern about moving away from universality is the concern that an announced intention 1o withdraw from the NPT also may occur in response to being caught in breach of the Treaty and reflect an intention openly to acquire nuclear weapons following withdrawal. North Korea has now made clear by its statements since January 2003 that this was precisely its intent. It is, therefore, fitting that this Review Conference, the first since North Korea's 2003 withdrawal announcement, consider Article X with great care.
States Party to the NPT enjoy benefits not available to those states that have chosen not to adhere to the Treaty. Among those benefits are the rights, privileges, and consideration due to a state which has adhered to and complied with its commitments; participation in deliberations such as this Review Conference and other meetings the purpose of which are to strengthen the Treaty; and access to cooperation and a broad range of technical support in the pursuit of peaceful purposes. A state that enjoys these benefits while violating its obligations then withdraws from the Treaty after advancing its non-peaceful program should not be permitted to benefit in any way from its deceit.
One thing should be made clear at the outset. Withdrawal does not absolve a slate of any violation of the Treaty that was committed while still a party to the Treaty. Should a party withdraw from the Treaty before it remedies any violations that it has committed, that state remains accountable for those violations even after it withdraws from the Treaty.
Should a party announce its intention to withdraw, the NPT and the nuclear nonproliferation regime already provide some means of addressing the situation. Although each case will have unique circumstances, it must be very clear to a party considering withdrawal for the purpose of manufacturing nuclear weapons that such actions have consequences.
It is useful to repeat the text of Article X. I:
Each Party shall in exercising its national sovereignty have the right to withdraw from the Treaty if it decides that extraordinary events, related to the subject matter of this Treaty, have jeopardized the supreme interests of its country. It shall give notice of such withdrawal to all other Parties to the Treaty and to the United Nations Security Council three months in advance. Such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests.
By requiring three months notice before withdrawal is complete, Article X gives parties the opportunity to seek to influence the withdrawing party or to prepare to deal with the consequences of a completed withdrawal. This notice must be given to the other NPT parties and to the UN Security Council.
NPT parties should consider undertaking a wide range of actions to seek to dissuade a state from withdrawal and to express opposition to an intended withdrawal. They should outline and be prepared to take measures if a slate withdraws after breach of the Treaty's nonproliferation obligations or for purposes of pursuing a nuclear weapons program. The NPT Depositary Governments should consult lo consider possible action.
Because an intention to withdraw from the NPT may be coupled with an intention to acquire nuclear weapons, the Security Council must carefully consider the security consequences of the intended withdrawal. Upon its receipt of a notification of withdrawal, the Security Council, therefore, should meet promptly to address the extraordinary events" cited by the party as giving rise to its intention to withdraw, The consequences for peace and security of the withdrawal, and the possibility of alternative measures short of withdrawal to address and resolve the circumstances cited by the party.
The Security Council has made clear that proliferation of nuclear weapons constitutes a threat to international peace and security. Accordingly, in a case of withdrawal from the NPT, the Council should consider the full range of options provided by the Charter and warranted by the circumstances of the case. Withdrawal by a party in breach of commitments freely undertaken - commitments that other Parties based their security
2
calculations on -- would further underscore the need for consideration of options by the UNSC.
The Security Council could ask the IAEA for relevant information, including the status of safeguards compliance by the withdrawing slate. The IAEA may be able to provide other information such as the state's capabilities in reprocessing and enrichment and any holdings of enriched uranium and plutonium.
The Security Council also may wish to undertake consultations with the withdrawing country and make clear the possible future steps the Council might take. Obviously, should the requirements of Article Xl be fulfilled and withdrawal completed, the Council may need to take some very stringent measures if it determines that the situation resulting from the withdrawal constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Independent of any action by the Security Council, the International Atomic Energy Agency's Board of Governors should consider the following:
). measures for continued safeguarding of nuclear equipment and material in the withdrawing state should the party complete the requirements of Article X;
prompt reporting to the UN Security Council of any outstanding safeguards or other compliance concerns; and
suspension of IAEA technical assistance to the party in question, whether on Sanitary grounds, as a matter of policy or as directed by the UN Security Council.
The United States believes that there should be no further nuclear supply to a country that has withdrawn horn the Treaty and is pursuing unsafeguarded nuclear activities or nuclear weapons. Even the act of providing a notification of withdrawal should provide sufficient cause for suspending nuclear supply in these instances. Nor should such a withdrawing party be allowed to benefit from the use of nuclear materials and equipment that it imported while it was party to the Treaty. This conclusion is fully justified because the assistance was provided based on the NPT party's professed commitment to the NPT and on its acceptance of comprehensive IAEA safeguards. When these commitments are renounced or violated, the withdrawing state should not be entitled to the benefits acquired while it was
3
a parry to the Treaty and subject to comprehensive safeguards. In these circumstances, nuclear supplier states may wish, through appropriate means, to seek a halt in the use of nuclear material and equipment previously supplied to the withdrawing state and the elimination of such items or their return to the original supplier. Nuclear suppliers should reserve these rights in their bilateral nuclear supply agreements. The Nuclear Suppliers Group, which is already considering a requirement that IAEA safeguards apply for the lifetime of supplied items, could also incorporate a "right of return" in its export guidelines. Return of such items could also be directed by the Security Council in a Chapter VII resolution if such an action were deemed necessary to respond to a threat to international peace and security. In the case of withdrawal, nuclear suppliers could also meet to consider joint or unilateral action to monitor compliance with bilateral assurances that may pertain to nuclear material and equipment supplied prior to withdrawal.
We note in this connection that under Article XT. A ,7 of the Statute of the IAEA, the Agency has the right to "withdraw any material or equipment made available by the Agency or a member" in furtherance of an Agency project if a recipient state does not comply with its safeguards agreement and fails to lake corrective action in a reasonable time. Article XII.C has a similar provision. Thus, the concept of removing materials and equipment from a State based on its failure to meet nonproliferation norms is not a new or novel concept.
Finally, parties may have their own intelligence and interdiction resources. In the event of withdrawal, parties with these resources could focus them on the withdrawing state in an attempt to stop any clandestine transfers directed at the acquisition of a nuclear weapons capability or of the proliferation of such technology to others.
The right to withdraw from the Treaty remains a sovereign right. But it is also true that parties to the NPT have a sovereign right to consider the ramifications upon their individual and collective security of such a withdrawal, including by slates that have breached their obligations prior to withdrawal. We, the parties to the Treaty, should make clear that consequences will flow from withdrawal from the Treaty and, in doing so, deter such actions and further the goal of universal adherence.

