STATEMENT
By H.E. Ambassador Duong Chi Dung
Head of Delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
at the 2018 NPT Preparatory Committee Session (Cluster 3)
(Geneva, Switzerland, 1 May 2018)

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation aligns itself with the statement by the representative of
Indonesia on behalf of Non-Alignment Movement.
Viet Nam reiterates the inalienable right of all the Parties to develop
research, production and use of nuclear energy for the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, as enshrined in Article 4 of the NPT. Viet Nam pursues the
consistent policy of exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy, while
ensuring nuclear safety and security, and in a responsible manner.
I

Viet Nam's related policy has been reflected in the Strategy for
Peaceful use of energy, adopted in 2006, the Atomic Energy Laws of 2008
and other relevant legislations which promote research and application of
radio and radioactive isotopes for socio-economic development. With an
existing atomic research centre in use, we · have utilised effectively the
benefits of atomic energy in agriculture, industries, health care, climate
change response and nuclear energy studies.
Mr. Chairman,

We concluded the Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA in 1990 and
ratified its additional protocol in 2012. We also participated in almost all
1

IAEA's related conventions on nuclear safety and security. We have strictly
adhered to our commitments under these instruments and our efforts have
been recognised by IAEA and other international partners.
In this spirit, Viet Nam calls on other Parties to join and implement
IAEA's instruments, particularly the conventions on safety, early
notification, assistance in case of incidents, for mitigating domestic and
trans-boundary possible impacts, thus further contributing to the NPT
effective implementation.
Mr. Chairman,
We highly appreciate IAEA for its technical assistance and technology
transfer to Viet Nam, as well as to other developing countries, to ensure the
rights and needs for development and usage of nuclear energy in a safe,
secure and peaceful manner. We are also grateful to other partners, including
the European Union, the United States, Russia, France, the United Kingdom,
Japan and the Republic of Korea for their valuable cooperation and supports
from in these fields.
We reaffirm our support for IAEA as the key international
organization in charge of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. However, we
emphasize that activities related to safeguards and verifications, including
collection of information from parties, should be conducted in a fair,
objective, technical credibility and non-discriminatory manner, in
accordance with respective safeguards agreement and additional protocol.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we strongly believe that successful
implementation of the NPT and its review process will contribute to global
sustaining peace and prosperity.
It is my delegation's hope that this equally important 3rd pillar of the
NPT would have its more emphasised and merit place in the outcome
documents and proposals of the PrepComs and of the 2020 NPT Review
Conference itself.
We thank you for your attention./.

2

