1

Statement by the Delegation of Argentina
Cluster 1
Viena, 5 May 2017
As delivered by the Permanent Representative of Argentina,
Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi

As we initiate the debates on the review process under the issues of this
cluster, we are aware of the clear and growing demand from the global civil
society and the international community as a whole, who expect concrete
progress towards disarmament that is irreversible, verifiable, and transparent.

Argentina is neither removed from nor indifferent to this claim. We share it,
based on our historical position for general and complete disarmament, where
nuclear disarmament is a priority, in accordance with Article VI of the NPT. In
this way, we reaffirm -as we have in every forum and negotiation we have
taken part of- once again, our commitment to work in a constructive manner,
seeking the widest consensus, in order to achieve a world free from nuclear
weapons.

Our flexibility to allow the adoption of a programme of work for the
Conference on Disarmament, the foremost multilateral negotiations forum,
demonstrates that commitment. We must avoid the marginalization of this
forum and, to that end, we are open to discuss and reflect on the elaboration

2

of innovative proposals that respect the security concerns of all Member
States.

Argentina is part of a region that has been historically at the forefront in
matters of disarmament and non-proliferation. It is not a by chance that Latin
America and the Caribbean have been the first nuclear weapon free zone
(NWFZ) in a densely-populated region. Its contribution to peace and security
at the regional and global level made by the Tlatelolco Treaty -with 50 yearshas been real and concrete, not just by strengthening the commitment of our
countries to disarmament and non-proliferation but also through its Protocols,
that allow the link to nuclear weapon counties so that they also refrain from
violating our status as a nuclear weapon free zone. Such commitments must
be honored and strengthened, and we encourage the revision of the
interpretative declaration that condition the object and the aim of Tlatelolco.

More recently, the Latin American and Caribbean States Community (CELAC)
has expressed its commitment to the consolidation of our region as a Peace
Zone in Declarations at the top political level, reaffirming to that end the
promotion of nuclear disarmament that is general, complete, and nondiscriminatory as a priority goal. The commitment of CELAC with nuclear
disarmament is clear, and has been expr3esssed in Special Declarations at each
of the Summits of Heads of State and Government.

3

From our viewpoint, the general and complete elimination of nuclear weapons
is the best guarantee against its use or the threat of its use, therefore avoiding
the irreparable humanitarian consequences. This concern has been shared and
emphasized in this setting, especially in the Review Conference 2016, where
over 150 co-sponsored the Joint Declaration on the Humanitarian
Consequences of Nuclear Weapons.

Before this new situation and given the current scenario, we cannot but
underline our apprehension because of the situation we face concerning
nuclear disarmament. We hope we can count, in this review cycle, with the
decisive commitment of the NWS to fulfill their obligations under the NPT,
particularly with regard to article VI. We have before us the chance offered by
the review process, for the international community to join its efforts to
generate spaces of dialogue and negotiation among NWS and NNWS that are
fruitful.

Mr. Chairman,

The demand of the international community, which expects progress towards
multilateral negotiations in nuclear disarmament, have led to the negotiating
process set out in UN General Assembly resolution 71/258 calling for the
negotiation of a legally binding instrument that bans nuclear weapons and
leads to their complete elimination. It is an initiative that stems from a
legitimate concern, of which Argentina is a constructive participant, while
convinced that this initiative must complement in an effective and explicit

4

manner the NPT as well as the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty (CTBT),
strengthening the achievements of theses legal documents in the field of nonproliferation.

We are also aware that the efforts of the international community to achieve
a world free of nuclear weapons, through its prohibition and complete
elimination, are not starting from scratch. For Argentina, article VI of the NPT
does not refer only to the obligation to eliminate nuclear weapons, through
general and complete disarmament, but also establishes an obligation that in
itself contains the concept of a ban. Therefore, the operational and binding
nature that this article has always had -and still has- must not be affected, in
order to reach this objective.

In the conviction that it is possible to advance in the elimination of nuclear
weapons, our steps towards that end must be sustained in solid control
system, to ensure they are verifiable, irreversible, and transparent. In the field
of disarmament and non-proliferation, our commitments -whether political,
legal, or other- are of relative value unless they are underpinned by a solid
verification system that is neutral, professional, and robust. It is in the benefit
and interest of all Parties -and in particular of developing states aspiring to
take full advantage of the potential of nuclear energy for sustainable energyto do so in a manner that is not only beyond reproach but also guaranteed and
certified by an international inspectorate. In matters of non-proliferation and
the potential hostile or non-peaceful use of nuclear materials, verification is
paramount.

5

To this end, it is necessary to develop adequate and sufficient capabilities.
Initiatives such as IPNDV and the future Expert Group on “Nuclear
Disarmament Verification” in the United Nations system are welcome,
together with the discussions on verification that are expected to continue
within the FMCT Expert Group.

Mr. Chairman,

The NPT establishes a balance of obligations between NWS and NNWS, which
in no way legitimates the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons, but that it
cannot be alleged by non-NW States to free themselves of their nonproliferation obligations, either.

The international nuclear nonproliferation regime faces a great challenge with
the situation created by the DPRK. The development of their military nuclear
program and the tests that DPRK has continued to make constitute a serious
threat to the stability of the NPT regime, as well as a real and present threat
to international peace and security. We regret, once again, these
developments and condemn it again in the strongest terms.

This situation compels us to reiterate, once more, the importance and the
urgency for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty to enter into force.
This instrument needs to be in force so it can become the legal grounds to
condemn nuclear testing under international law and even to have inspectors

6

on-site and take concrete steps on the basis of the information obtained. We
call on those States that have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty, especially
those whose ratification is indispensable for the CTBT to enter into force. It is
hard to understand the logic of a gradual approach to disarmament that does
not include the prompt entry into force of the CTBT.
Mr. Chairman,

Regarding the specific issue of nuclear disarmament and security assurances,
the clauses of the NPT offer a balance of rights and duties among all Parties. In
this perspective, the non-nuclear-weapon States will not reach our full security
as long as the NWS do not move forward in the acceptance of effective
international agreements offering guarantees that such weapons will not be
used against us nor will its use be threatened. Since de adoption of UN Security
Council resolution 255, the NWS recognized the need to draft credible
commitments that offer assurance to those who have voluntarily renounced
the possession of such weapons, that those States who do have nuclear
weapons will not commit the absolute excess of using them against the
unarmed. It is incomprehensible that fifty years later, such commitment has
not been incorporated in a simple and clear legal instrument. There are no
exceptions or interpretations that could nullify the commitment made.

The demand for a legally-binding instrument that offers security assurances
can contribute to restore confidence, but cannot be understood as replacing
the obligations undertaken by Nuclear Weapon States to destroy their
arsenals.

7

At the same time, the possible adoption of an Agreement granting security
assurances may not undermine those assurances already made by NWS in the
framework of the nuclear weapons free zones and of the resolutions of the
Security Council.

Mr. Chairman,

On our path to the Review Conference 2020, important challenges lie before
us. It is necessary to move forward in a balanced way in all three pillars of the
Treaty, on the basis of the commitments already undertaken. The nuclear
energy development for peaceful uses plays against the security aspects - not
only non-proliferation, but also the belief that the path towards a much safer
world involves the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman

