check aaainst deliverv

First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
30 April 2012
Cluster I
Delegation of Austria
Statement by Ambassador Alexander Kmentt
Mr. Chairman,
1) As highlighted in our general statement on Monday, this review cycle is of crucial importance. I t will largely
determine to what extent the NPT is a credible framework for nuclear disarmament. The forward looking action
plan that was agreed in 2012 may not be perfect. I f implemented credibly, however, i t would put us on a right
track towards a world without nuclear weapons. By 2015 there should be clarity whether we are moving in this
direction in a credible manner. Contrary t o what happened after the 13 steps that were agreed in 2000, words
must be matched with action. Nuclear weapon states have the prime responsibility for nuclear disarmament. We
look upon them t o demonstrate that the commitments they have undertaken are put into concrete actions and we
would like t o express our hope that we will see such action between now and 2015.
Mr. Chairman,
2) We hope that by 2015 we will have seen clear steps t o diminish the role and significance of nuclear weapons in
all military and security concepts, doctrines and policies. Continued large-scale and long-term investments into the
modernisation of nuclear weapons arsenals, for that matter, are not conducive for this credibility and, in our view,
incompatible with the disarmament commitments of nuclear weapons states and the aspirations of global
conscience for this goal. The CTBT will have t o be brought into force or at least significantly closer t o this goal.
Further progress on bilateral US-Russia negotiations should have been made. Multilateral disarmament
negotiations need t o have been initiated, such as on an FMCT, and serious multilateral processes will have t o be
on track on other important nuclear disarmament issues, t o list but the most important issues. I n addition, we
look forward to nuclear weapons states fulfilling the important transparency commitments contained in the action
plan. We do not underestimate the challenges for nuclear weapons states related to nuclear disarmament and we
do not expect that all actions will have been implemented by the time of the next Review Conference. Iwould like
t o stress again, however, that by 2015 the direction with respect t o achieving a world free of nuclear weapons
needs t o be clear and credible. It is the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States that nuclear weapon
States restrain themselves in the development and qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons. Thus Austria has
supported a side-event on nuclear weapon modernization a t this PrepCom. Furthermore, Austria and many other
States are determined t o heed t o the call "to make special efforts t o establish the necessary framework to achieve
and maintain a world without nuclear weapons" in a way that corresponds t o the five-point proposal of the UN-SG.
Mr. Chairman,

3) The prime responsibility of nuclear weapons states notwithstanding, Article 6 is an obligation of all States party
t o the NPT. The action plan reflects this by listing many actions that can and should be undertaken by all. Austria
is determined t o do its part t o give this action plan a fair chance. We will report on actions that we have
undertaken and encourage all states t o do the same. We should use this action plan as a tool for implementation
and a focussed debate. It will allow us a serious and open assessment in 2015 of where we stand.
Mr. Chairman,
4) I n response t o action 20, Austria would like t o highlight the following points related to the implementation of
the outcome of the 2010 Conference in addition to the comprehensive report that has been submitted by the
European Union, which Austria fully supports.

5) Austria would like t o underscore its firm commitment with respect t o the principles and obiectives of nuclear
disarmament aareed t o in 2010. This includes in particular, the resolve t o seek a world without nuclear weapons
and the continued validity of the 2000 Final document as well as the importance of universality of the NPT.
Moreover, Iwould also like t o underscore the importance of the recognition contained in the 2010 Final Document
of "the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and the need to comply a t all
times with international law and international humanitarian law". Austria was pleased to work with a group of likemined states on a joint statement on the humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament. We are convinced of
the validity of this approach and of the need t o fundamentally change the discourse on nuclear weapons. We need
t o move away from a debate that is still dominated by outdated military security concepts originating from cold
war enemy and threat perceptions. Instead, we need t o foster the understanding that any use of nuclear weapons
would be morally repugnant, incompatible with international law, in particular with fundamental principles of
international humanitarian law and devastating in its effects for the whole world and all of humankind. Austria is
committed t o developing this approach further and we look forward t o working closely with interested states and
civil society who will have t o play a crucial role in this respect.
Mr. Chairman,

6) With respect t o Action 1 and Austria's commitment t o pursue a world without nuclear weapons, Iwould like t o
recall that in 1999, the Austrian Parliament adopted a constitutional law (149/1999) on "A nuclear-free Austria".
I n its article 1, the law stipulates that "It is prohibited to produce, stockpile, transfer, test o r use a nuclear weapon
in Austria. I t is further prohibited t o establish installations for the stockpiling o f nuclear weapons in Austria". More
recently, Austria's Federal President stated on the occasion of the September 2009 UN Security Council Summit
that "The prospect o f a world without nuclear weapons m u s t become a goal shared by a l l States. Austria supports
the idea o f a Nuclear Weapons Convention (...)". Moreover, in March 2010 the Austrian Parliament adopted a
decision supported by all parties calling on the government t o work for a world without nuclear weapons and
support the UNSG's five point plan. The Austrian government has consistently and for decades supported nuclear
disarmament and we will continue t o do so.

7) Austria fully supports implementation of Actions 6, 7 and 15, which call for negotiations on an FMCT and serious
multilateral processes t o be initiated on nuclear disarmament and negative security assurances. The continued
dysfunction of the Conference on Disarmament (CD) and its inability t o begin substantive work is, however,
greatly disconcerting and has undermined the legitimacy of the CD as a viable forum for negotiations. Austria has
strongly supported the UNSG's initiative of a high level meeting and consistently advocated the need t o move
towards substance. We would like t o reiterate that successful implementation of Actions 6, 7 and 15 requires
credible and flexible efforts on the substance of the issues. Our inability t o get a particular forum to work cannot
exempt us from trying t o make substantive progress. Last year, Austria, together with Norway and Mexico,
presented a draft resolution t o the UNGA with the aim of taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations,
which is of direct consequence for the implementation of the commitments contained in the action plan.
Unfortunately, the situation is even worse today and the need to find a way t o address these crucial issues in a
multilateral framework is ever more compelling. I f we are serious with the implementation of these action items,
we need t o act.
8) Actions 12 - 14: Austria fully supports the CTBT as a key pillar of both, nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation and collaborated in the drafting of the Vienna Group of 10 working paper. The crucial role of the CTBT
and the importance of its entry into force are raised on a regular basis in bilateral, regional and global meetings by
the Austrian Minister for European and International Affairs, as well as by other high-level Austrian officials,
including parliamentarians. Corresponding reports are submitted t o Article XIV Conferences of the CTBT. While
Austria raises the issue with all states that have not yet ratified the Treaty, the ratification of Annex I 1 states is
particularly important. The Actions related t o the CTBT do not say that i t is necessary t o wait for the ratification of
a particular Annex I1 state. Austria would like t o appeal t o all Annex I 1 states t o take serious ratification steps as
soon as possible. While we hope that the expressed US commitment t o ratification will be followed up as soon as
possible, we appeal t o China t o live up t o its global role and responsibility and ratify the treaty without delay. I n
addition, we appeal t o India and Pakistan to capitalise on the huge confidence building potential of the CTBT and
t o sign and ratify the CTBT as a means t o halt the dangerous arms race trajectory that we currently see unfolding
in Asia. Moreover, Iran should use the CTBT t o build confidence as regards the intentions of its nuclear program
and all states of the region, including notably Egypt and Israel should follow suit. Austria also fully supports the
build-up of the CTBT verification regime which has reached a very mature and impressive level. Austria has
provided voluntary financial contributions t o the CTBT for a variety of activities. Let me mention in this context,
the successful science and technology conferences in 2009 and 2011 t o which we contributed significantly.
9) Action 19 and 22: I n Austria's view, increased cooperation by all stakeholders is of key importance for
sustained progress on nuclear disarmament. The role of the UN is indispensable in this respect. I am pleased t o
report that, following the announcements of Foreign Minister Spindelegger at the 2010 Review Conference, the
newly established Vienna office of the UN-Office of Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) started operating a few months
ago. It will facilitate closer cooperation and effective interaction in all areas of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control with Vienna-based organizations. I n addition the Vienna Centre for Disarmament and Nonproliferation (VCDNP) started working one year ago. It has already changed the landscape in Vienna by providing
a forum for serious exchange between diplomats and academics. A large number of high-profile ad high-quality
events have been organised on disarmament and non-proliferation issues and contributed greatly t o stimulate our
work here in Vienna. Iam particularly pleased about the educational and training activities provided by the Centre
which will have a significant long-term effect. We are pleased that the substantial Austrian financial support for the
ODA Office and the VCDNP is making an important contribution t o an increased cooperation t o our collective work.
With respect t o disarmament education, Iwould like t o highlight also the very successful 'Critical Issues Forum"
that brought high school students from the nuclear weapon states Russia and the USA and non-nuclear weapon
states Austria and Bosnia-Herzegovina t o Vienna t o attend the PrepCom and work on nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation issues. This demonstrates our firm view that nuclear issues are a concern for all states. Finally, I
would like to mention the working paper on disarmament education that we have submitted t o this PrepCom
together with Japan.
Mr. Chairman,
10) Let me close by reiterating our commitment t o the NPT and the implementation of the 2010 conclusions and
recommendations for follow-on actions. We should use the opportunity give t o strengthen the cohesion for this
important treaty. Credible progress towards a world free of nuclear weapons is the best and only viable way t o
achieve this goal.
Thank You

