AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA
Australian Mission to the United Nations

E-mail australia@un.int

nd

150 East 42 Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.AustraliaUN.org

Third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Cluster I Statement by Ambassador Peter Woolcott, Australian Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Geneva and Ambassador for
Disarmament
2 May 2014

Mr Chairman,
Over the past year, Australia has continued its concerted efforts to deliver on its long
standing commitment to nuclear disarmament. The crucial way forward is for us all to
work to a successful outcome for the 2015 NPT Review Conference.
Australia is a member of the twelve-nation Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
(NPDI) which is doing just that, through its emphasis on comprehensive implementation
of the 2010 NPT Review Conference Action Plan. Through the NPDI, Australia has
continued to urge nuclear-weapon States (NWS) to pursue nuclear disarmament in good
faith. This cross-regional and diverse group of countries share in common a commitment
to the NPT and to the goal of total elimination of nuclear weapons. At the most recent
Ministerial Meeting of the NPDI, held in Hiroshima last month, we reaffirmed that
commitment and to actively contribute to the 2015 NPT review process.
The building blocks of that process are well known to everyone here today. These
include increased transparency to build confidence and support further disarmament; the
entry into force of the CTBT; the start of negotiations on, and earliest conclusion of, a
FMCT; reduction in the operational status of nuclear weapons systems; diminishing the
role of nuclear weapons in security policies; and reduction in the number of non-strategic
nuclear weapons. These building blocks help create an environment where countries,
including the NWS and those who rely on their nuclear umbrella, believe themselves to
be more secure without nuclear weapons than with them.
And, of course, disarmament and non-proliferation are pillars one and two of the NPT,
not silos one and two. The building blocks of a non-discriminatory, global and effective
non-proliferation regime are also essential if we are to attain the goal of eliminating
nuclear weapons.

-2Mr Chairman,
Australia welcomes the renewed global focus on the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons. It underpins all the work of the NPDI, and indeed, the very existence of the
NPT. But we see no short cuts to global disarmament. We must, however, do better. The
2010 NPT Action Plan already includes most of the steps required to advance the
disarmament and non-proliferation objectives encapsulated in the NPT. We must show
greater global will, and work in concert, to implement it fully and without delay. The
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons use demands it.
Mr Chairman,
Australia welcomes the ongoing implementation of New START and hopes that the
treaty arrangements can remain quarantined from the current tensions over the situation
in Ukraine. Encouraged by US President Obama’s proposal in his speech in Berlin in
June 2013, the NPDI urges the US and Russia to negotiate further and deeper cuts.
Delivering on the three principles of nuclear disarmament will be a key requirement if we
want a successful 2015 NPT Review Conference, noting that the principle of
transparency underpins those of verification and irreversibility.
In 2012, the NPDI submitted a working paper on transparency which contained a draft
standard nuclear disarmament reporting form so that the NWS could have a template with
which to implement Action 21. The NPDI called on the NWS to agree on a standard
reporting form and to make regular reports on their nuclear disarmament activities.
At this PrepCom the P5 have for the first time presented reports on their steps to meet
their disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses obligations as agreed in the 2010
NPT Action Plan. To varying degrees these reports have made public more information
about nuclear arsenals, policies and plans to reduce stockpiles of warheads.
Australia welcomes the P5 reports as a useful first step by the NWS towards meeting
their reporting obligations. We expect the NWS will continue to build on their reports,
recognising that increased transparency is fundamental to building trust and confidence which are the key political ingredients for making decisions to reduce the size of nuclear
arsenals.
The NPDI reporting template which was passed to the NWS, remains our preferred level
of detail. But the important thing is that the NWS now appear to be on the pathway to
greater transparency and this is something we will continue to push for.
In this regard we encourage all States to complete and present their annual national
reporting plans – Australia has submitted its reporting plan against the 64 points of the
2010 Action Plan, and we expect this document to be up on the Paper Smart portal soon.
Australia is also pleased to submit to this Preparatory Committee a working paper on dealerting on behalf of the NPDI. The call to de-alert is included in both the 2000 Review
Conference on the 13 practical steps towards nuclear disarmament and in the action plan
[Action 5(e) and 5(f)] adopted at the 2010 Review Conference. The paper highlights the

-3fact that de-alerting can also provide a boost to disarmament efforts and help deemphasise the role of nuclear weapons. The NPDI urges all NWS to take concrete and
meaningful steps to reduce the operational readiness of nuclear weapons systems,
consistent with their commitments under Actions 5(e) and 5(f), and to provide an update
to NPT States Parties.
Mr Chairman,
The Foreign Minister of Australia, Julie Bishop, spoke at the Conference on
Disarmament (CD) in March 2014 where she called for action to be taken lest that
Conference render itself irrelevant. All Parties must agree on a comprehensive and
balanced program of work, with the commencement of negotiations on a FMCT the
highest priority.
Australia is doing what it can to get the CD to live up to its heritage of contributing to a
safer and more peaceful world. We are working actively and constructively within the
Informal Working Group, to “adopt and implement a program of work at the earliest
possible date in the 2014 session”.
The world’s patience is limited. If the CD remains moribund, it calls into question its
role as the single multilateral disarmament negotiations forum. We are an active
participant in the Group of Governmental Experts to propose recommendations on
aspects of a FMCT which met in its first session in Geneva in March 2014. The first
session, under the excellent chairing of Canada, has done good work in zeroing in on the
key issues and has conducted its work in an interactive and non-polemical fashion.
Mr Chairman,
Australia welcomes the recent ratification of the CTBT by Guinea-Bissau, Iraq and Niue.
We once again call upon all remaining Annex II States to ratify the treaty without delay
so that the CTBT can finally enter into force. Entry into force has long been a major
Australian and NPDI priority, and it is disappointing that we find ourselves still arguing
its merits in 2014.
In preparation for entry into force, Australia continues to work on supporting the
verification capacity of the CTBTO’s International Monitoring System (IMS).
Mr Chairman,
We are now at the business end of the Review Cycle and less than a year away from the
Review Conference. The 2010 NPT Action Plan is our roadmap and how we mark what
is sufficient progress will be the critical question confronting States next year. Clearly
progress on the Action Plan has varied across the three pillars and progress on the
disarmament pillar has been patchy.
We call on all States and in particular the NWS to meet their undertakings under the
Action Plan with renewed vigor. We must escape the cycle of success and failure that has
characterized past Review Conferences. The hard, practical and sustained work to bring
about a world free of nuclear weapons is still in front of us.

