2012 Preparatory Committee Meeting for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapous
Cluster I Debate (Disarmameut and Security Assurances)
Statement by Australia
MrChairman
The NPT is based on mutually reinforcing non-proliferation and disarmament
obligations. Without the NPT, we would have seen many more countries developing
nuclear arsenals - and far less progress on disarmament than what we have achieved.
We warmly welcome the entry into force last year of the US-Russian Treaty on
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms - or
New START - as well as the unilateral steps taken by the United Kingdom and
France to reduce their nuclear arsenals.
These positive steps must be followed by continued and systematic reductions in all
categories of nuclear weapons, as well as a diminishing of their role in national
security strategies.
MrChairman
In July 2010, Australia and nine other countries established a new international group
- called the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) - with one broad
objective: to help take forward the 2010 NPT Review Conference Action Plan.
Among the NPDI's current priorities is to encourage greater transparency in nuclear
disarmament. The 20 I 0 Review Conference committed the NWS to make concrete
progress towards nuclear disarmament and, under Action 21, encouraged them to
agree on a standard nuclear disarmament reporting form as a transparency and
confidence-building measure. Last year, the NPDI took the initiative of developing a
draft reporting form and shared it with the NWS, as a contribution to their
deliberations in meeting this objective. The NPDI has submitted the form to this
PrepCom meeting as part of the general debate on nuclear disarmament.
We look forward to contributing further on nuclear disarmament transparency, as part
of our efforts to encourage progress on this issue. All States Parties should report
transparently on their efforts to implement the Treaty. Australia, in accordance with
Action 20, has submitted to this PrepCom a comprehensive national report on our
own implementation of the Action Plan and, through it, the NPT as a whole.
The NPDI is also dedicated to achieving a start to negotiations for a verifiable,
irreversible treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons - an
FMCT.

It is very disturbing to us that negotiations on an FMCT - enjoying near-universal
support - have been stymied in the Conference on Disarmament (CD) for now over
15 years.

This year, NPDI members will convene experts' meetings to discuss technical issues
relating to an FMCT and to feed into the CD's consideration ofthis important issue.
Australia urges all NPT States Parties to support these meetings. The NPDI has also
submitted a working paper on FMCT to this PrepCom.
In the meantime, we encourage all relevant states to refrain from the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons purposes.
MrChairman
Australia believes that, in addition to an irreversible and verifiable FMCT, entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is a crucial
intermediary step towards the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Australia therefore congratulates Indonesia for its ratification of the CTBT in
February this year. Indonesia's leadership sets an example to the eight remaining
Annex 2 states whose ratifications are necessary for the Treaty's entry into force. We
urge all states which have not yet signed and ratified the CTBT to do so without
delay.
Meanwhile, it is vital that all nuclear-armed States maintain their moratoriums on
nuclear testing. The Group stresses, however, that such moratoriums cannot serve as
a substitute for ratifYing the Test-Ban Treaty and that only the CTBT in force offers
the global community the prospect of a permanent and legally binding commitment to
end nuclear testing.
Mr Chairman
Australia would like to see stronger security assurances from NWS to non-nuclearweapon States (NNWS), with fewer caveats than exist in current negative security
assurances.
Australia welcomed the United States' declaration in its 20 I 0 Nuclear Posture Review
that it would not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NNWS that are in
compliance with their NPT obligations. We encourage all NWS to make similar
commitments.
In the meantime, Australia considers nuclear weapons-free zones to be important
vehicles for providing negative security assurances to NNWS NPT states parties.
MrChairman
Nuclear disarmament cannot progress in a vacuum; it goes hand-in-hand with the
strict adherence by all states to their non-proliferation obligations under the NPT.
The 2010 Review Conference final document has given us a valuable opportunity to
strengthen the NPT regime for decades to come. At the start of this new NPT review
cycle, I urge all states parties to continue working towards the comprehensive
implementation of all Actions of the 2010 Action Plan.

