Check against delivery
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
25 April 2013
Delegation of Austria
Cluster 1
Statement by Ambassador Alexander Kmentt
Mr. Chairman,
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the EU yesterday. In addition to
the national implementation report submitted by Austria, I would like to make the following
comments.
As we said in the general statement, there appear to be serious contradictions and differences
in the way key provisions of the NPT and NPT-based commitments are seen within the treaty
membership. This is particularly the case for nuclear disarmament. We are concerned about
the NPT’s ability to sustain these contradictions for much longer. They need to be addressed
and solved.
For the most part of the nuclear age, the parameters were clear: A few states only were in
possession of nuclear weapons and had the required knowledge and technological capabilities.
These parameters are fast losing their validity. The technological hurdle still exists but it is
getting lower by the day. More and more states – and potentially non-state actors – will be in
a position to de facto reach or cross the line of nuclear weapons capability. The decision to do
this will increasingly become a political rather than technological one. The consequences of
this trend cannot be overstated. It means an exponentially increasing risk of nuclear weapons
proliferation and, consequently, the risk of their use by someone somewhere. A focus on nonproliferation alone – as important as it is – is ultimately doomed to fail. With the
technological threshold getting lower and the interest in nuclear technology getting higher, the
only long term approach is to build credible political and legal barriers against nuclear
weapons as such and to reduce and eliminate the perceived political and security motivations
for the possession of these weapons.
This needs to be done with a much greater sense of urgency, since there is a race against time.
The global regime can either be maintained and maybe even strengthened and the spread of
nuclear weapons stopped. Or the legitimacy of the NPT and the entire regime will be
undermined with the potential consequence of more and more actors seeking to develop
nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons states have the prime responsibility to prevent this but
they need to realise with urgency that in the final consequence they cannot have it both ways.
We see today that global efforts to counter the proliferation of nuclear weapons – which
Austria fully supports – would be significantly aided if the main proponents would not rely on
nuclear weapons as “ultimate guarantors of security” for themselves. Admittedly, discarding
nuclear weapons takes a lot of political courage on the part of those who have relied on their
national nuclear deterrence capabilities for the past decades, but this is a step that is long
overdue. All non-nuclear weapons States can assist in making this step easier to take.

Mr. Chairman,
Austria considers the agreement achieved by consensus of the conclusions and
recommendations for follow-on actions as a very important accomplishment. We hope for full
and credible implementation of these commitments and we will try to contribute to this to the
extent possible. One important element of the 2010 outcome is that there are concrete actions,
particularly on nuclear disarmament, the implementation of which can be measured and
assessed critically. Let me pay tribute at this stage to the important role of civil society in
providing us with important information on the state of implementation. There are several
substantial reports by civil society organizations. Unfortunately, though, they all paint the
same picture: Implementation of the nuclear disarmament commitments is unsatisfactory.
Austria welcomes all steps that have been taken by nuclear weapons states, such as the
START Agreement between RF and US on reductions of strategic nuclear weapons, some
changes in nuclear doctrines, as well as some steps to increase transparency. Every step that
moves us away from the dangers of nuclear weapons needs to be seen positively. These steps,
however, are clearly not enough. In Austria’s view the credible implementation of Article 6
and of the various commitments agreed to in the past Review Conferences would mean that
nuclear weapons states demonstrate in a discernible way a clear direction away from their
reliance on nuclear weapons. This, however, is nowhere in sight.
In 2015, the status of implementation of the disarmament commitments will be a major factor.
NPT-non-nuclear weapons states will look upon the overall picture and specifically at
•
•
•
•
•

What changes have been made to diminish the role of nuclear weapons?
What changes have been made with respect to operational readiness and alert status?
What decisions are made in nuclear weapons states with respect to budget allocations
and investments in nuclear weapons and their infrastructure?
What will be the progress towards the long overdue entry into force of the CTBT and
What will be the situation in the multilateral disarmament machinery – especially in
the Conference on Disarmament?

We call on the nuclear weapons states to take these concerns – which are probably shared by
most other NPT state parties – seriously and to accelerate their efforts for a credible and
transparent implementation of their nuclear disarmament commitments.
Mr. Chairman,
On a more positive note, there is clearly a growing understanding that progress on nuclear
disarmament needs be made and that the current situation – in terms of process but more
importantly on substance – is no longer acceptable. Several initiatives have been launched,
which Austria has either contributed to or has supported. They are different manifestations of
one thing: The strong wish for progress on nuclear disarmament.
The open-ended working group on “Taking Forward Multilateral Nuclear Disarmament
Negotiations” decided by the UNGA last fall offers an opportunity to generate more
momentum towards nuclear disarmament. We currently do not have comprehensive and
interactive discussions about nuclear disarmament in any multilateral forum. The OEWG is a
forum and an opportunity to have this discussion about nuclear disarmament, the possible
ways forward and the challenges. It is also an opportunity to address some of the
contradictions
and
different
perspectives
that
were
mentioned
earlier.

Austria hopes that the OEWG will be used in this way and will thus be a contribution to
generating momentum for progress on nuclear disarmament. We would like to state clearly
that we see the establishment of the OEWG entirely consistent and contributing to the
objectives of the NPT and the 2010 Action Plan.
Austria also supported the General Assembly resolutions on convening a HLM meeting on
nuclear disarmament as well as the establishment of a Group of Governmental Expert on an
FMCT. We are confident that these initiatives will also generate momentum for our shared
goal.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria is convinced that it is necessary and overdue to put the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons at the center of our debate, including in the NPT. Nuclear weapons are not
just a security policy issue for a few states but an issue of serious concern for the entire
international community. The humanitarian, environmental, health, economic and
developmental consequences of any nuclear weapons explosion would be devastating and
global and any notion of adequate preparedness or response is an illusion. We are highly
appreciative that the government of Norway provided the international community with an
opportunity for an in depth and enlightening discussion on this important topic. This discourse
needs to be furthered. We look forward to the follow up conference in Mexico and to other
future occasions. Austria was pleased to participate in and contribute to the joint statement
that was delivered by South Africa on behalf of over seventy states yesterday. I would like to
stress that in Austria’s view, a key motivation behind the NPT and the entire nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation regime is the humanitarian imperative: to prevent nuclear
weapons from being used, to eliminate this existential threat from the face of the earth and to
make sure that unacceptable humanitarian consequences from these weapons do not occur.
Arguments that this discourse may in any way distract or divert from the NPT implementation
are therefore unconvincing and misguided.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria puts a particular emphasis on the role of civil society in the international debate on
disarmament and non-proliferation. During the NGO Panel, we listened to the voices of the
„youth of the world“ – our future, and we thank them for their engagement. We have joined
also in a statement that Japan will deliver on behalf of a group of member states on the
importance of disarmament and non-proliferation education. We would also like to express
our satisfaction that the Vienna Centre for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation (VCDNP) has
been established in 2011 as an independent think-tank and that the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs has opened its Vienna Office in 2012. Both entities have been set up
with significant Austrian financial support and are making important contributions to our
collective work.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me close by reiterating our commitment to the NPT and the implementation of the 2010
conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions. We should use the opportunity to
strengthen the credibility and cohesion of this important treaty. Clear progress towards a
world free of nuclear weapons is the best way to achieve this goal.
Thank you.

