Mr. Chairman,
Brazil strongly believes that global security can only be thoroughly accomplished by means of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons and the assurance that these will never be produced or used again. This basic principle corresponds to the central aim of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
While we welcome the efforts made by the Nuclear-Weapon States for the reduction of stockpiles, the progress achieved thus far does not necessarily represent a commitment to nuclear disarmament. This commitment would be best demonstrated through the adoption by these States of measures aimed at diminishing the role of nuclear weapons in their defense strategies. Unfortunately, this has not been the case, as we witness the emergence of new rationalizations concerning the use of nuclear arsenals which even include the possible development of new and more accurate arms. Particularly worrisome is the fact that these modernization processes indicate that nuclear weapons will remain operative.
All States Parties to the NPT must play a part in our quest to strengthen the Treaty. However, concrete steps in nuclear disarmament incumb upon Nuclear-Weapon States. Brazil would very much welcome that these States issue a declaration in support of the NPT before the 2010 Review Conference, as occurred in 1995 and 2000.
Progress towards a full and integral implementation of the NPT is largely dependent on a consistent reduction of nuclear arsenals and on the pursuit of arms control agreements that entail not only dismantlement but also irreversibility. Achievements made in nuclear disarmament should stem from multilaterally negotiated, irreversible and verifiable agreements.
Brazil expects the Nuclear-Weapon States to accelerate the implementation of their "unequivocal undertaking" to nuclear disarmament made at the 2000 NPT Review Conference and provide full and transparent reporting on what has already been done and on the envisaged future progress towards nuclear disarmament.
In this connection, it would be useful that, based on the information available, a comparative table of the measures undertaken by the Nuclear-Weapon States to comply with obligations under Article VI be put together, as proposed by our Delegation at the I PrepCom, in Vienna, last year. This would provide States Parties with the means for a better evaluation of progress in the field of nuclear disarmament. Such a table, or comparative chart, could then be used at the NPT Review Conference in 2010.
Mr. Chairman,
Proliferation, both vertical and horizontal, is a threat to the whole international community. The Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference to which all States Parties agreed reaffirmed that "the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons". The achievement of this goal would help contribute significantly to offsetting the risk of nuclear proliferation to States as well as non-state actors. Nonetheless, the fulfillment of the " 13 steps" on nuclear disarmament agreed during the 2000 Review Conference has been significantly challenged. Brazil understands that, notwithstanding changes that occur in the international security scenario, agreements reached at earlier conferences are necessarily valid and shall by no means be overlooked.
The Treaty's legitimacy or relevance may ultimately be affected by disregard for the provisions of Article VI. In light of this issue's centrality, Brazil favors the undertaking by the current review process of a thorough review of the implementation of the 2000 NPT document - or lack thereof -, including the agreed "practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement
Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" and paragraphs 3 and 4(c) of the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament".
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction will not be possible unless consistent steps are taken towards disarmament, especially as regards nuclear weapons. The shift towards almost exclusive priority given to non-proliferation, at the expense of the debate on disarmament, has contributed in a decisive manner to the lack of substantive progress on the pertinent discussions in the last few years.
Mr. Chairman,
The current review process should reinforce the plea in favor of the expeditious negotiation in the Conference on Disarmament of a fissile material treaty.
My delegation would also like to seize this opportunity to call upon all States, and particularly the Nuclear-Weapon States that have failed to sign and ratify the CTBT, to do so without delay and to refrain from any activities harmful to the Treaty. In the meantime, we urge the Nuclear-Weapon States to do their utmost to strengthen the moratorium, including stronger statements of having no intention to resume nuclear testing.
Nuclear disarmament remains the highest priority in the international peace and security agenda.
I thank you.