I Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Brazil
Cluster I
Mr. Chairman,
The current state of affairs regarding the implementation of the NPT’s
disarmament pillar is appalling. Heading to the Treaty's 50th
anniversary, ours is a world infested with thousands of nuclear weapons,
many of which are still on a hair-trigger alert, enough to inflict
unprecedented catastrophic consequences.
Moreover, all Nuclear Weapon States are carrying out today initiatives
aimed at modernizing their nuclear arsenals. Under rehashed rationales,
the role of nuclear weapons in security policies is being reaffirmed, both
nationally and in the context of military alliances which rely on nuclear
arms.
While we welcomed bilateral and unilateral reductions that took place,
years or decades ago, they are no substitute for truly systematic steps to
comply with the obligations enshrined in the Treaty and the
commitments agreed upon in past Review Conferences. Had they been
fulfilled in good faith, we would be moving, even if incrementally, towards

the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, in an irreversible,
transparent and verifiable manner.
As a concrete contribution to this debate, the New Agenda Coalition has
presented a Working Paper on strengthening accountability through
enhanced transparency. Nuclear Weapon States reports regarding their
national implementation of Article VI have not yet been standardized, in
line with Action 21 of the Plan adopted by the 2010 Review Conference.
We hope that the Preparatory Committee will discuss options, including
possible

benchmarks,

to

improve

the

measurability

of

the

implementation of nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments, in
order to ensure and facilitate the objective evaluation of any progress.
Mr. Chairman,
The goal of a world without nuclear weapons is regrettably more elusive
than ever. The so-called “step-by-step” approach advocated by Nuclear
Weapon States and their military allies has fallen into discredit not only
for lack of concrete action or the reiteration of flawed deterrence policies,
but also in light of ongoing modernization programs which characterize a
new, qualitative, and possibly even more perilous, nuclear arms race. All
such steps have a direct, negative impact on the NPT’s integrity and its
credibility as the cornerstone of the international nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament architecture.
The UN took a historic step, by convening the first session of the
Conference to negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear
weapons, leading towards their total elimination. We welcome the
substantive engagement of all delegations present in New York, and we

are confident that the Conference will succeed in achieving its mandate
in the coming months.
The Ban Treaty will not create a parallel regime. The treaty under
negotiation is complementary to the NPT and will invigorate its purpose.
By filing a legal gap and stigmatizing this category of weapons of mass
destruction, the prohibition will give additional impetus for protracted
compliance with Article VI.
Mr. Chairman,
In parallel with negotiations of a Ban Treaty, progress on important
interim measures remains urgent, such as the long-awaited entry into
force of the CTBT, as well as the conclusion of a treaty that gives effect
to the legitimate interest of non-nuclear weapon States in receiving
unequivocal and legally binding security assurances from nuclear
weapon States. Also relevant would be the conclusion of a multilateral,
non-discriminatory and verifiable treaty on fissile materials for nuclear
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices, one

that includes the

issue of stocks of such materials, thereby furthering both nonproliferation and disarmament objectives.
Unilateral statements of intent from the nuclear weapon States are not
enough. In line with Action 9 of the 2010 NPT Action Plan nuclear
weapon States should (i) conclude the pending signatures or
ratifications, without reservations or interpretations, of all negative
security assurances protocols to the treaties that establish nuclearweapon-free zones; and (ii) withdraw the interpretative declarations to
the protocols that have already been ratified.

Nearly forty years ago, the General Assembly’s First Special Session on
Disarmament (SSOD-I) recognized that “effective arrangements to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons could strengthen the security of those States and
international peace and security." We, therefore, call upon all States to
negotiate and conclude a legally binding treaty on this issue as soon as
possible.
Mr. Chairman,
Greater progress on nuclear disarmament is a top priority. Increasingly,
civil society around the globe understands that there is no room for
procrastination. The NPT review cycles cannot be an exercise in rolling
over commitments every five years. 2020 should represent a turning
point in this regard. We should muster the political will and exercise
leadership in order to ensure the success of the Review Conference with
the necessary sense of urgency and responsibility.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

