BRAZIL
Statement by the Delegation of Brazil
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons - Main Committee I
New York, 1May2015
(check against delivery)
Mr. Chairman,
Let me congratulate you on assuming the Chairmanship of this Main Committee. Brazil fully
associates itself with the statement delivered by New Zealand on behalf of the New Agenda
Coalition (NAC).
Mr. Chairman,
Enduring non-compliance with Article VI remains the single biggest hurdle to the full
implementation of the NPT and the attainment of a world free of nuclear weapons. The current
implementation gap between nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation obligations has become
unsustainable.
The so-called step-by-step approach has failed. Notwithstanding some welcome efforts, effective
progress remains elusive.
Arsenal reductions, especially when carried out in the context of modernization programmes and
vertical proliferation, do not equal nuclear disarmament.
Full compliance with article VI, and therefore with the NPT, will only be achieved with
transparent, verified and irreversible disarmament measures. Brazil believes that this should be
carried out by means of a comprehensive Convention on nuclear disarmament, with the
participation of all nuclear-weapon States. It is this Conference's responsibility to move towards
that goal with concrete commitments on nuclear disarmament.
In light of these considerations. Brazil would like the Conference, in its Final Document, to:
- Express its deep concern at the continued risk for humanity represented by the existence of
nuclear weapons and the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would result from their
use.
- Welcome the successful convening of the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons and urge all States parties to put the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons at

the center of the nuclear disarmament debate in all disarmament-related fora, including the
United Nations General Assembly.
- Affirm that nuclear disarmament and ()ther related measures should be pursued within a
multilaterally agreed legal framework with specified timelines.
- Welcome efforts towards the development of nuclear disarmament verification capabilities
which will be required to ensure compliance with nuclear disarmament agreements for a nuclearweapon-free world, and underscore the central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in this process, in accordance with its statute and relevant IAEA General Conference resolutions.
- Welcome the adoption of UNGA Resolutions 68/32 and 69/58 entitled "Follow up to the 2013
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament" and urge all States parties
to fully implement their provisions, particularly with regard to the urgent commencement of
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on nuclear disarmament and to the convening, no
later than 2018, of a United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament
to review the progress in this regard.
- Recall the five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, which proposes, inter allia, to consider negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention or
agreement on a framework of mutually reinforcing instruments, backed by a strong system of
verification, and welcome new proposals and initiatives from Government and civil society in
this regard, including the Austrian Pledge and the proposal presented by Cuba at the Conference
on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in Vienna (December 2014) for the adoption in
2018 of a convention on nuclear disarmament.
Pending the conclusion of negotiations on nuclear disarmament, we would also like the
Conference to:
- Urge the nuclear-weapon States as well as States parties that are part of regional alliances based
on the use of nuclear weapons to take effective steps to diminish and ultimately eliminate the
role of nuclear weapons in their security doctrines.
- Request the nuclear-weapon States to refrain from carrying out quantitative and/or qualitative
improvements to their nuclear arsenals, as such actions run counter to the Treaty's objectives.
- Urge the nuclear-weapon States to commit to report on an annual basis on progress concerning
their implementation of disarmament-related actions contained in the 2010 Action Plan and to
inform, as soon as possible, and no later than on the First Preparatory Committee to the X NPT
Review Conference, in 2017, on a timeframe for their implementation.
- Renew support for the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other weapons of mass destruction, recall the endorsement by the 2010 Review Conference of
practical steps in a process leading to the full implementation of the resolution on the Middle
East adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and, while noting efforts undertaken to date, express its
concern regarding the lack of implementation of those steps.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

2

