Check against delivery!

2018 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Review Conference
April 23 - May 4, 2018, Geneva

Statement by Bulgaria
Cluster 1 issues, 25 April 2018

Mr. Chairman,
Bulgaria fully associates itself with the statement made by the EU. I would like to
touch upon some issues of particular importance to us.
Bulgaria reiterates its commitment to the objective of achieving a world free of
nuclear weapons. This is our shared goal and we all have to act in a sustainable,
realistic and responsible manner, aimed at bridging our differences and realizing
progress towards its implementation.
We are convinced that the only realistic way to attain the goal of effective,
verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament is through progressive approach
based on practical and doable steps. The legal framework to pursue this objective is
provided by the NPT and its Article VI. This treaty-level commitment to eliminate
nuclear weapons has a proven record of significant achievements. The NPT is the
only credible instrument for nuclear disarmament and we have to focus our efforts
to further consolidate its regime.
This process should take into account the complex security environment and the
strategic context while having in mind also the concerns about the risks posed by
nuclear weapons. Seeking a common ground and embarking on realistic measures
that enhance the credibility of the existing regime is indispensable to advance on
nuclear disarmament. Progress towards a world without nuclear weapons could be
achieved only through a gradual and inclusive approach with the active
participation of nuclear weapons' states, and due consideration of the security
interests of all states.
The 20 IO NPT Review Conference Action Plan gives an agreed roadmap with
building blocks essential to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. The CTBT is
of key importance for furthering the nuc]ear disarmament and non-proliferation
regime. We call upon all States, in particular those bearing responsibility under
Annex II, to sign and ratify the CTBT as a matter of priority. The growing security
tension and the repeated actions by the DPRK. in defiance of all relevant UN
1

Check against delivery!

Security Council resolutions stress the urgent need to have the CTBT into full legal
standing. We note the recent announcement by the DPRK to suspend nuclear
testing as encouraging but we underline the need for concrete steps that should lead
to the country's complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
The commencement of negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) in
the Conference on Disarmament is another significant element of the progressive
approach and a priority for us. This would further the implementation of the NPT
and its Article VI and reinforce non-proliferation norms and obligations. We expect
the recommendations of the High-Level FMCT Expert Preparatory Group to
advance the important work done so far and bring the process closer to the start of
negotiations.
The challenges that mark the current security environment make even more
pressing the need to invest serious efforts in building trust and confidence. A
credible verification is indispensable for advancement of nuclear disarmament and
establishing confidence. In this regard, we welcome the forthcoming discussions at
the Group of Governmental Experts on verification as well as the ongoing work in
other fora, such as the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
Verification (IPNDV), that contribute to this end.
While welcoming the progress so far in implementation of Article VI, we strongly
encourage further reduction of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons
stockpiles in unilateral, bilateral or plurilateral context, as another practical step
towards global nuclear disarmament.
In concluding, I would like to stress once again the continuous commitment of
Bulgaria towards the achievement of a world without nuclear weapons in a
progressive and pragmatic manner that will foster the strategic stability and will
create conditions for further progress.

2

