
Mr. Chairman,
Canada joins others here in welcoming the long-overdue return to global parlance of the commitment to work collectively and individually to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. It is clear that the three pillars of the Treaty will become increasingly interdependent as we move towards this goal. Effective and robust verification and transparency measures will be a shared responsibility of nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states alike, in order to ensure the implementation of and compliance with nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation obligations and to maintain the confidence that the sole purpose of States Party's nuclear activities is the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In this regard, Canada appreciates the leadership of the United States in recent months on this issue, including signature of 'New START with Russia, the transparency of the US Nuclear Posture Review and the strong, collective vision set out by the Nuclear Security Summit. These recent achievements should breed further success as transparent nuclear disarmament actions by all nuclear weapon states are necessary in order to further commitments made under Article six of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman, this year Canada assumed the G8 Presidency. At the end of March, the G8 Foreign Ministers met in Gatineau and released a statement on nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses as a contribution to this Review Conference. In it, the G8 Foreign Ministers set as a common goal the adoption of "a balanced and concrete outcome document that contains a follow-up action plan, balancing rights, responsibilities and actions on all pillars of the Treaty". In addition, on behalf of the G8, Canada delivered demarches in more than 40 states that have yet to sign or ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), in order to urge their governments to do so. Entry into force of the CTBT remains a key piece of unfinished business on the agenda of the international community and is intrinsically linked to the strength of NPT.
Disarmament is also advanced by reducing and securing potential sources of fissile material, including plutonium and highly enriched uranium. Since 2002, Canada has worked through the G8-led Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction to secure, and when possible, destroy weapons and materials of mass destruction in several regions of the world. In total, Canada has spent more than $330M on nuclear security programming through the Partnership.
Mr. Chair, these initiatives help to deal with the current security threat posed by unsecured fissile material, but it is a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) which is the instrument needed to forever turn off the tap. In the past year, our hopes were raised that negotiations on an FMCT would at last begin when agreement was reached on a Program of Work in the Conference on Disarmament (CD). Then last November the UN General Assembly was, for the first time in seven years, able to adopt by consensus a Canadian-led resolution on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. However, the CD has again returned to a state of paralysis. It is Canada's view that formal work on a
treaty should begin immediately even though the final outcome cannot be predicted. It is also our view that 'consensus' has become an obstacle to starting disarmament work at the CD and this is not what our predecessors had in mind. As we have seen on the landmines, cluster munitions and arms trade issues, the CD no longer holds a monopoly on disarmament negotiations and where there is the political will a political way can be found. Canada will help foster this political will.
The commitment to nuclear disarmament has long been part of Canada's multilateral vocation, and this is carried out with careful consideration of our membership in NATO. Canada will continue to work with its NATO partners to advance common positions on such issues as Alliance nuclear posture and sub- strategic nuclear weapons in the context of the Strategic Concept Review. The recently released US Nuclear Posture Review provides an important point of departure for discussions on these and other issues. Canada will actively engage in those discussions mindful of our collective security requirements and the long-term goal of achieving a world without nuclear weapons. Achieving the world we want will require work now on key interim achievements that are within our grasp, including the entry into force of the CTBT and a FMCT, among other elements of the 13 practical steps. Canada remains firmly committed to a common nuclear policy within NATO. This does not however prejudge future developments including consideration of practical disarmament measures that could be taken to realize the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman. Five years ago, Canada's opening statement to Main Committee One took up each of the 13 Practical Steps in turn. Canada has reported against each of these steps at every NPT meeting since 2000, including at this one [NPT/CONF.2010/9]. Reporting is something we can and should all do, nuclear- weapon states and non nuclear-weapon states alike, to increase transparency and build confidence in our mutual commitment to the Treaty's implementation.
Mr. Chair, life for the NPT should indeed begin again at age 40. There is broad agreement on what needs to be done to achieve nuclear disarmament and some world leaders are now generating the political will to make real progress. Good ideas abound. Australia and Japan have provided a 'New Package' that contains measures worthy in our view of serious consideration. The New Agenda Coalition's working paper advances similar and additional ideas, including the importance of transparency for irreversible weapons reductions. Progress has also been achieved on elements of the UN Secretary General's Five-Point Plan. What we need now is to develop and agree on a disarmament action plan beyond 2010 that will reinvigorate the 13 Practical Steps. We need to look with fresh eyes on how we go about our multilateral disarmament business. Canada will work with you to achieve these ends.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.














Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



