
Nuclear Disarmament
Nuclear disarmament remains the essential goal of the NPT. It is at the heart of its fundamental bargain and its indefinite extension. We must not lose sight of this objective. Ail states, particularly the five nuclear-weapon States, must demonstrate fidelity in deeds, as well as in words, to Article VI.
Mr. Chair, there is a practical means for all to demonstrate what they are doing to implement their commitment to the Treaty and to Article VI in particular. This is through the submission of a report, as provided for in Step 12 of the 13 Steps toward nuclear disarmament adopted by the 2000 Review Conference. While Step 12 applies to all States parties, there is naturally particular interest in the nuclear-weapons states' actions to fulfil Article VI, as they are the only ones permitted possession of nuclear weapons by the Treaty. They have also accepted the obligation of disarmament, leading to the elimination of their arsenals. Nuclear disarmament concerns us all; it is natural and legitimate that NNWS expect transparency about the weapons states' progress toward disarmament
Canada welcomes the progress that has been made so far by some NWS in reductions, and we appreciate the amount of information that most of them have provided to recent PrepComs, including on arsenals, nuclear weapons holdings, operational status and reductions, numbers of deployed strategic vehicle deliveries and warheads, and - at least by one - numbers of available weapons. It would be desirable for all five to provide as much information as possible on these and on current deployments and on holdings of both strategic and non-strategic weapons, operational or readiness status of arsenals, and on policy and doctrine. Much information is publicly available and much can be provided without impairing national security. Giving NNWS a clear understanding of the policies and practices of the NWS will assist all in dealing with Article VI. We continue to believe that providing such information in the form of a formal report, which can be officially circulated, translated and form part of NPT documentation, allows both a better understanding and better implementation of the Treaty, and reinforces the commitment to permanence with accountability.
Much has been said about the importance of implementing the Treaty and the desirability of progress. En route to achieving our goals, States parties need to be able to take stock of this progress, to reflect and to encourage further progress. This brings me to more general reflections about reporting, looking ahead to next year's Review Conference.
Experience with reporting has been positive - a growing number of States parties are submitting reports, containing much relevant material, and are making use of these reports to inform preparations, participate in interactive dialogue and foster Treaty implementation.
Mr. Chair, we have submitted a third Working paper on Reporting by States parties (issued as NPT/CONF.2005/PC.III/WP.2), reviewing reporting to date, and proposing some thoughts and ideas to take it forward, with a view to a decision at next year's Review Conference. Our assessment is that the value of reports has been widely recognized and appreciated. They have become an important tool in support of the Treaty, contributing to permanence with accountability, promoting a culture of transparency, providing valuable information, encouraging all States party to take ownership of their Treaty and its objectives and to showcase what they have done to further its aims, demonstrating their commitment to the Treaty. Reporting can foster more effective implementation of the Treaty, help to measure progress and compliance, build confidence and convey a sense of participatory democracy.
Given this valuable role, we believe that reporting should become a permanent feature. We continue to honour its inception in Step 12, with its focus on Article VI. But given the interdependence in the Treaty of disarmament and non-proliferation obligations, and the value of transparency and information-sharing, we believe that the scope of reporting can and should be further broadened and advanced. In our Working paper, we have suggested some ways to do this, mindful of the need not to be overly burdensome and of the desirability for flexibility and comparability. Particularly at this critical juncture in the life of the Treaty, reporting offers a real and concrete way by which all States parties can support a strong NPT. It would encourage ongoing active contribution to sustaining our Treaty and to reaching its goals.
Mr. Chair, we see reporting as an outcome of the Review Conference. We look forward to discussing and working closely with interested States parties here, and over the coming year, to develop a recommendation for adoption next year.
