2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee I: Disarmament
Statement by Canada
Mr. Chairman,
We welcome this year's Review Conference as an important opportunity to reiterate our
unshakeable commitment to advancing the cause of nuclear disarmament. Colleagues know
well Canada's longstanding support for a step-by-step approach to disarmament. This
commitment stems from the belief that realistic, practical efforts can build progressively upon
each other to implement the commitments enshrined in Article VI. While we seek progress
across all major lines of work concurrently, we continue to take a view that pragmatism is
paramount and a lack of progress in one area should not prevent the international community
from seeking to advance others.
In this light, it is important to acknowledge that, since the successful outcome of the last NPT
RevCon in 2010, some progress has been achieved but much more remains to be done.
The discussion of the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons has raised awareness of
the need to move towards our common goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. Recognition of
the conscience-shaking consequences of nuclear war underpins our efforts to pursue practical
and effective nuclear disarmament. These consequences are not constrained by borders or
level of development: no level of preparation could expect to mitigate the human, environmental
or financial toll caused by even one nuclear weapon explosion in an urban area. Reducing and
ultimately eliminating the risk that nuclear weapons will be used remains at the heart of the
NPT's grand bargain. Canada was pleased to join the Australian-led joint statement in this
regard.
Canada also remains convinced that any realistic prospect for progress requires that both the
humanitarian and security dimension of nuclear weapons be taken into account. Disarmament
does not and cannot take place in a vacuum: we need to be mindful of the strategic security
context and the practical challenges facing nuclear disarmament. It is essential that the states
that possess nuclear weapons must be actively engaged in the disarmament process and that
international trust and confidence be reinforced. The international community needs to ensure
that international security and stability will be maintained as stockpiles are drawn down and are
eventually eliminated. This process will not be easy or quick, but it is essential.
Nuclear Weapon States should continue to take concrete measures to reduce the number of
strategic and non-strategic weapons and to reduce their reliance on them in their security
doctrines. The implementation of the New START agreement and recent unilateral reductions
undertaken by the United Kingdom and France are good steps in this direction and we welcome
them. However, further steps are needed to continue to reduce the number of nuclear weapons
to lower levels be it through unilateral, bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral steps. Canada and its
partners in the NPDI have advocated for achievable progress to further the goals of reducing
the alert levels and reliance on nuclear weapons. We hope that these proposals can feature as
part of the final outcome of this RevCon and help chart a path forward to further real and
concrete progress.

.-,"'[·'

~--';·-,~

I" ··: .

Canada welcomes the commitment of the Nuclear Weapon States during this review cycle to
meet regularly to increase mutual trust and confidence and to implement their commitments
made in 2010. We welcome their efforts to develop a glossary of nuclear terms and to submit
more regular reports on their implementation of the Treaty. Further progress will be necessary
to meet the high expectations the international community has set. We strongly encourage the
Nuclear Weapon States to increase the quantity, quality, relevance and frequency of their
transparency effort in line with Actions 5 and 21 of the 201 OAction Plan.
Mr. Chairman,
Canada is honoured to have chaired to successful conclusion the Group of Governmental
Experts on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices. This collaborative effort has witnessed some of the most important
technical and policy-neutral dialogue on a treaty in many years. The Group's final report offers a
comprehensive review of the multiple and interrelated aspects of a treaty. It will provide useful
sign posts to assist those who will negotiate a treaty in the future. The GGE served to increase
interest in and momentum towards a treaty. It is now up to all states to determine how to use the
Group's report and how to take forward the negotiation to which we all committed in Action 15
five years ago.
While Canada continues to believe that the Conference on Disarmament is the best venue in
which to negotiate a treaty, it is not the only one in which to do so. The time has perhaps come
for NPT States Parties to decide if support for negotiations exclusively in the CD is worth the
price of an indefinite delay in starting those negotiations. A verifiable FMCT is the only way to
ensure the tap of fissile material for nuclear weapons is turned off for good. Pending real and
substantive negotiations on an FMCT, we call on the one Nuclear Weapon State that has yet to
do so to unequivocally declare a moratorium on the production of fissile materials for nuclear
weapons. Such a demonstration of commitment to disarmament would bring us closer to
realizing the goal of one day creating the conditions leading to a world without nuclear weapons.
Another important element to achieve the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons is a fully in
force Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Canada continues to play an active role in
encouraging further signatures and ratification of the Treaty with a view to achieving its entry
into force as well as its universality. We were pleased to co-host the September 2014 CTBT
Ministerial Meeting, which produced a Joint Ministerial Statement that was endorsed by a record
105 states. We call on NPT States Parties that have yet to do so to sign and ratify the CTBT as
soon as possible and without condition.
While the international community awaits the final eight ratifications needed to achieve entry into
force, Canada also calls on all NPT States Parties to work with the CTBT Organization in
Vienna to complete its robust verification system. This includes completing all stations to be a
part of the International Monitoring System and contributing to the development of the
Organization's on-site inspection capabilities. Canadian experts were pleased to participate in
the Integrated Field Exercise in Jordan last November, particularly to monitor the use of
airborne radiation detection equipment contributed by Canada in September 2013.
Mr. Chairman,
Five years ago we agreed to a series of ambitious actions to help achieve the objective of
nuclear disarmament. The measures included in the 201 O Action Plan were intended to promote
continuous progress to reduce nuclear arsenals while strengthening the international legal

-

'
regime against their spread. This is the surest way to prevent their use and, eventually, lead to
their elimination. This RevCon offers an opportunity to assess the implementation of the 2010
Action Plan as well as commitments made at previous RevCons, notably in 2000. Canada
believes this Main Committee and this RevCon should seek to identify ways to strengthen the
implementation of the commitments we have made and to build upon these commitments in an
outcome to this conference. Standing still cannot be considered progress if we are to one day
achieve our collective goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman

i

•

