Statement by H. E. Mr. Wu Haitao
Chinese Ambassador for Disarmament Affairs
on the Issue of Nuclear Disarmament
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Vienna, May 3, 2012)

Mr. Chainnan,
Promoting international nuclear disannament process, eliminating
the threats of nuclear war and establishing a nuclear-weapon-free world is
an important goal of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons has achieved positive outcome
for the promotion of the goals of the Treaty by adopting action plans,
including in the field of nuclear disannament. The international
community should take this opportunity to jointly create favorable
conditions and advance the international process of nuclear disannament.
First, All nuclear-weapon states should dedicate themselves to the
goal of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons. They should earnestly fulfill their obligations under article VI
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and undertake not to seek pennanent
possession of nuclear weapons.
Second, all nuclear weapon states should abandon the nuclear
deterrence policy based on first-use of nuclear weapons. All nuclear
weapon states should undertake unequivocally not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons; and undertake unconditionally not to use or threaten to
use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states or
nuclear-weapon-free zones so as to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons.
The policy and practice of 'nuclear umbrella' and 'nuclear sharing'

should be abandoned. Countries that deploy nuclear weapons abroad
should withdraw all such weapons.
Third, States possessing the largest nuclear arsenals should take the
lead in drastically reducing their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable,
irreversible and legally binding way, so as to create necessary conditions
for the complete and thorough nuclear disarmament. When conditions are
ripe, other nuclear weapon States should also join the multilateral
negotiations on nuclear disarmament. To attain the ultimate goal of
complete and thorough nuclear disarmament, the international community
should develop, at an appropriate time, a viable long-term plan composed
of phased actions, including the conclusion of a convention on the
complete prohibition of nuclear weapons.
Fourth, countries that have not done so should sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty as soon as possible so that it
may enter into force at an early date according to relevant provisions.
Pending the entry-into-force of the Treaty, nuclear weapon states should
continue to observe their moratoria on nuclear explosion tests.
Fifth, The Conference on Disarmament in Geneva is the most proper
forum to negotiate a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. It should start at an
earlier date the negotiation of the treaty with comprehensive participation
of all parties concerned.
Sixth, nuclear disarmament should follow the guidelines of
'promoting global strategic stability' and 'undiminished security for all'.
The development and deployment of missile defense systems which
disrupt global and regional strategic balance and stability should be
abandoned, so as to avoid impairing international nuclear disarmament
efforts. Multilateral negotiation process to prevent the weaponization of
and arms race in outer space should be vigorously promoted.
Mr. Chairman,
China has never evaded its due obligations and responsibilities in
nuclear disarmament.
2

Firstly, China has always pursued the policy of no-first-use of
nuclear weapons. Ever since the first day it came into possession of
nuclear weapons, China has solemnly declared not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons at any time or under any circumstances. Whether
confronted with the nuclear threat and nuclear blackmail during the Cold
War, or faced with the great changes that have taken place in the
international security environment after the Cold War, China has always
stayed true to its commitment. China's policy in this regard will remain
unchanged in the future. China also undertakes that we will
unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Secondly, China has never participated in any nuclear arms race.
China has always exercised utmost restraint in the development of
nuclear weapons. China has kept its nuclear capabilities at the minimum
level required for national security, and never competes with other
countries on nuclear capabilities in terms of input, number or scale.
China has never deployed any nuclear weapon on foreign territory.
China has never taken part in any nuclear arms race in any form and will
never do that in the future.
Thirdly, China actively participates in the international nuclear
disarmament efforts. China supports the principles and objectives of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and observes moratorium on
nuclear testing. China has actively supported and participated in the
preparatory work of the CTBTO, and steadily promote the preparatory
work for national implementation of the CTBT. China has attended all
the Conferences on Facilitating the Entry-into-Force of the Treaty and is
dedicated to promoting its early entry-into-force. China supports the
early commencement of the FMCT negotiation in the Conference on
Disarmament so as to conclude a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty.
Fourthly, China actively participated in the efforts of implementing
the Final Document of the 8th Review Conference of the Treaty. China
has attended the two P5 'Verification, Transparency and Confidence
Building Measures' Conference and the P5 Experts' Meeting on Nuclear
3

•
Disannament Verification in a constructive manner. And we will
continue to participate constructively in the following meetings
including the Washington Conference to be held in June. China is
chairing the work of P5 Working Group on Nuclear Glossary and
Definitions and will push forward relevant process actively to achieve
tangible outcome.
China will, as always, continue to support finnly the international
nuclear disannament process and is willing to work with the
international community to make efforts for the success of this session
of the Preparatory Committee and the 2015 Review Conference.
Mr. Chainnan,

The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper entitled
Nuclear Disannament and Reduction of the Danger of Nuclear War,
which elaborates comprehensively China's position and we hope the
elements in the working paper be fully reflected in the relevant report of
the Preparatory committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chainnan.

4

