Statement by the Chinese Delegation on the Issue of Security
Assurances at the Main Committee I of the 2015 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(May 2015, New York)

Mr. Chairman:
As an important issue of Non-Proliferation Treaty, security assurances to
non-nuclear-weapon states is of great realistic significance in promoting nuclear
disarmament process and preventing nuclear weapons proliferation.
China believes that having given up developing or acquiring nuclear weapons,
non-nuclear-weapon states have contributed to the prevention of nuclear weapons
proliferation and nuclear disarmament in the interest of world peace arid stability.
They ought to get security assurances from nuclear-weapon states, which shouldn't be
regarded as a benefaction given by nuclear-weapon states to non-nuclear-weapon
states. Getting security assurances will not only be conducive to maintaining the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, but also to enhancing the mutual trust
among nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states, so as to build a
favorable international environment for nuclear disarmament. Therefore, the
non-nuclear weapon states are fully justified and reasonable to demand not to be
threatened by nuclear weapons and to insist that the security assurances to be ensured
in a legally-binding manner.
The fundamental solution to address the issue of security assurances is complete
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. Pending the realization of
this goal, all nuclear-weapon states should undertake not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons at any time or under any circumstances, and undertake unconditionally not
to use or threat to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or
nuclear-weapon-free zones, and to conclude international legal instruments without
delay in this regard in the Conference on Disarmament. Besides, the nuclear-weapon
states should also diminish the role of nuclear weapons in their national security
policy and refrain from listing any states as targets of nuclear strikes, and not
targeting the nuclear weapons under their control at any country. All these measures
will be conducive to the progress on security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon
states.

Mr. Chairman,
China has all along committed lIDconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-weapon-free zones. China
always calls upon other nuclear-weapon states to undertake such commitments and
conclude an intemal legally binding instrument in this regard. China supports the
Conference on Disarmament to begin substantive work on concluding an international
legally binding instrument on security assurances at an early date. Meanwhile, China
is open to any other suggestion or measure which is conducive to promoting the
nuclear assurances issue and will give it positive consideration. China has signed and
ratified relevant Protocols to the Treaty of Tlatelo1co, the Treaty of Rarotonga and the
Pelindaba Treaty. China has recently ratified the Protocol to the Treaty on a
Nuclear-weapon-free Zone in Central Asia. We're ready to sign the Protocol to the
Treaty on Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone at an early date. China calls on
nuclear-weapon states to support the efforts of non-nuclear-weapon states to establish
nuclear-weapon-free zones and undertake corresponding obligations in a legally
binding manner.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

