Check Against Delivery

Statement by Chinese Delegation at the Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
on Nuclear Disarmament
(26th April, 2018 Geneva)

Mr. Chairman,
The complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and the
ultimate attainment of a nuclear-weapon-free world, serve the common interests of
mankind and constitute a shared aspiration of all countries.
In order to effectively promote nuclear disarmament, the international community
should have a sense of historical responsibility of building a community of shared
future for mankind through consultation and joint efforts, uphold a concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, stick to
multilateralism with the basis of equal participation by all sides, and maintain the
authority and effectiveness of the existing multilateral disarmament machinery. In
concrete terms, all parties should make further efforts in the following areas:
I) Promote the building of a new form of international relations characterized by
mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation, fully respect and
accommodate the legitimate and reasonable security concerns of all states, and
strive to build a peaceful and stable international security environment.
II) Take fair and reasonable nuclear disarmament steps of gradual reduction towards
a downward balance, relevant measures should follow the principles of
“maintaining global strategic stability” and “undiminished security for all”.
III) Country possessing the largest nuclear arsenals bear special and primary
responsibility for nuclear disarmament, it should effectively implement existing
nuclear arms reduction treaties and on this basis, continue to further drastically
reduce their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable, irreversible and legally binding
manner. This would create conditions for other nuclear-weapon States to join in
multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament.
IV) Reduce the role of nuclear weapons in national security doctrines, and abandon
the policy of nuclear deterrence based on the first-use of nuclear weapons. All
1

nuclear-weapon States should commit to no-first-use of nuclear weapons
unconditionally, and conclude international legal instruments in this regard. The
historic process of banning biological and chemical weapons shows that
“no-first-use” is the most practical, feasible and most valuable means of nuclear
disarmament at present.
V) All nuclear-weapon-states should commit themselves to the effective
implementation of Article 6 of the NPT, and openly declare that they have no
intention to seek permanent possession of nuclear weapons. Relevant
nuclear-weapon States should put an end to the policy and practice of nuclear
umbrella and nuclear sharing, and withdraw all nuclear weapons that are deployed
in other countries.
VI) Strengthen preventive diplomacy and appropriately address impact on global
strategic balance and stability posed by technological advances in fields such as
outer space, cyber space, AI (artificial intelligence) etc., in order to create a
conducive international environment for the nuclear disarmament process.
Mr. Chairman,
Certain country clings to the cold war mentality, hypes up threats from other countries
as a pretext of building up its own nuclear capability. It seeks to strengthen the role of
nuclear weapons in national security doctrine, to expand the scope of nuclear
deterrence, and to lower the threshold for the use of nuclear weapons. Such policy
adjustments will bring serious negative impact to global strategic balance and the
international security environment, and will also significantly increase the risk of
nuclear arms race and the potential danger of a nuclear war. These irresponsible
moves constitute not only an avoidance of its own nuclear disarmament obligation,
but also a mockery of international nuclear disarmament efforts. Ultimately it will
hurt itself by its own doing.
Over the years, China has actively supported international efforts in nuclear
disarmament, earnestly fulfilling its obligations and significantly contribute to
promoting nuclear disarmament through concrete actions.
— China remains committed to the path of peaceful development, adhering to a
nuclear strategy of self-defense, and upholding an open, transparent and
responsible nuclear policy.
— China has never deployed any nuclear weapons abroad, nor participated in nuclear
arms race of any kind. Our nuclear force is always kept at the minimal level
required by national security.
2

— China undertakes not to be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and under
any circumstances, and unconditionally commits itself not to use or threaten to use
nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones.
China is the only nuclear- weapon state that has made this commitment.
— China supports the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, honoring its commitment to moratorium on nuclear test, and making
steady progress in domestic preparation for the implementation of the Treaty.
Since the first session of the PrepCom last year, a batch of IMS monitoring
stations in China has been certified by the PTS, highlighting China’s firm support
to the Treaty.
— China supports the early commencement of negotiation on FMCT in the
Conference on Disarmament, on the basis a comprehensive and balanced program
of work, and the mandate contained in the Shannon Report. The high-level FMCT
expert preparatory group should conduct its work in strict accordance to its
mandate, so as to ensure its outcomes would be conducive to the authority of the
CD.
— China has issued several White Papers to elaborate its nuclear strategy, and
submitted its national NPT implementation report. We fully engaged in dialogue
and consultations with the other four nuclear-weapon States on confidence
building measures and on implementing NPT review outcomes. We lead the P5
Working Group on the Glossary of Key Nuclear Terms, achieving results in 2015
as a first step, ready for new progress with continuous efforts.
Mr. Chairman,
We fully understand the good will of non-nuclear-weapon States to speed up
international nuclear disarmament. We are ready to make unremitting efforts together
with all parties to this end. The goal of nuclear disarmament cannot be achieved
overnight. Following the principles of maintaining global strategic stability and
undiminished security for all, nuclear disarmament should take a step-by-step
approach. The relevant processes should uphold the principle of consensus, and
precede within the framework of existing authoritative disarmament mechanisms.
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on nuclear issues, which
elaborates China's relevant positions. We hope the elements contained therein will be
reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

