Check Against Delivery

Statement by Chinese Delegation at the First Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
on Nuclear Disarmament

Mr. Chairman,
It is a shared aspiration of all countries in the world and in the common interest of
mankind to completely prohibit and totally eliminate nuclear weapons and to diminish
the threat of nuclear war. China is pleased to witness that, since the 1960s, when
China advocated the complete and thorough nuclear disarmament, the belief of a
nuclear-weapon-free world has received more and more extensive response and
support.
Nuclear disarmament is one of the important goals of the Treaty on the NonProliftration ofNuclear Weapons (NPT) . Under the current international situation,
the fundamental guarantee and effective path oftaking forward nuclear disarmament
is to insist on the existing international arms control and disarmament mechanism,
insist on preserving and promoting the authority, universality and effectiveness of
the NPT, and insist on multilateralism with universal and equal participation of all
parties.
China believes that the international community should continue to make the
following efforts:
-

To actively advocate and pursue a common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security concept in the spirit of jointly building a community of shared
future for mankind, to jointly build a peaceful and stable international security
environment, so as to foster favorable conditions for nuclear disarmament.

-

To take just and reasonable nuclear disarmament steps leading to gradual
reduction and a downward balance. Relevant measures should be consistent with
the principles of maintaining global strategic stability and undiminished security
for all.

-

Countries possessing the largest nuclear arsenals bear special and primary
responsibilities for nuclear disarmament. Such countries should earnestly comply
with the treaties already concluded on reduction of nuclear weapons and further
reduce their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable and irreversible manner, so as to
1

create conditions for achieving the ultimate goal of complete and thorough
nuclear disarmament.
-

Pending the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons,
the most realistic and feasible nuclear disarmament measure is: all nuclearweapon States commit themselves to no first use of nuclear weapons and
undertake unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and conclude an
international legal instruments to this end.
nuclear-weapon States should reduce the role of nuclear weapons in their national
security doctrines, abandon the policies of nuclear deterrence based on first use of
nuclear weapons, and observe their commitments not to target nuclear weapons at
any country. States who have deployed nuclear weapons abroad should withdraw
and repatriate such weapons and abolish the policy of nuclear umbrella and the
practice of nuclear sharing.

-

The Action Plan agreed upon in the 2010 NPT RevCon, which includes a detailed
roadmap for advancing international nuclear disarmament process, constitutes a
valuable consensus reached by all parties after repeated negotiations, and should
be continually implemented in a balanced manner.

Mr. Chairman,
As an important part and parcel of general and complete disarmament, nuclear
disarmament is not only mutually complementary to nuclear non-proliferation, but
also could not be isolated from the current trend of new armament development. In
recent years, with science and technology developing by leaps and bounds, the
militarization and weaponization trend in the field of outer space, cyber space and
artificial intelligence have exerted complex and far-reaching impact on strategic
security environment. To tackle nuclear disarmament issues in isolation while turning
a blind eye to the erosion of nuclear non-proliferation regime caused by the practice
of double standard and ignoring the emerging arms race in high-tech fields is
tantamount to getting blood from stone. In order to push forward nuclear
disarmament process in a favorable security environment, the international
community should pay particular attention to the following issues:
(a) Since the entry into force of the NPT, to promote nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation has gradually become an international norm accepted by the
whole international community. Neither withdrawal from the NPT nor refusal to
accede to the Treaty exempts relevant countries the bind of the NPT's purpose and
principles. In this regard, the international community should completely abandon
2

the practice of double standard and refrain from calculating out of selfish
geopolitical interest, destructing the Treaty's cornerstone status. All UN Security
Council resolutions on non-proliferation should be implemented in a
comprehensive and non-discriminatory manner.
(b) To develop and deploy missile defense systems which impair global strategic
balance and stability, will definitely damage the international and regional security
environment and exert negative impact on nuclear disarmament. Countries
concerned should immediately stop and abandon such policy and practice.
(c) To prevent an arms race in outer space complements nuclear disarmament efforts.
Should substantial progress in the field of preventing an arms race in outer space
be made in the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva or other fora, it is not only
conducive to maintaining outer space security and to improving strategic mutual
trust among nations, but could also create favorable conditions for nuclear
disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
China has all along actively supported international nuclear disarmament efforts,
fulfilled its nuclear disarmament obligations in good faith, and made important
contributions in practical way to promote nuclear disarmament process.
-

China firmly pursues a path of peaceful development, adheres to a self-defensive
nuclear strategy, and maintains an open, transparent and responsible nuclear
policy.

-

China has never deployed nuclear weapons in any other countries; nor has it ever
participated in nuclear arms race of any kind and will not do so. China has long
kept its nuclear capabilities at the minimum level required for national security.

-

China is firmly committed to the policy of no-first-use of nuclear weapons at any
time and under any circumstances. China also undertakes unconditionally not to
use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States or
nuclear-weapon-free zones. China has long advocated nuclear-weapon States to
conclude relevant international legal instrument thereupon.

-

China supports the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and honors its commitment to a moratorium on nuclear test. Last
December, the China Lanzhou Radionuclide Station has been certified by
Preparatory Commission of CTBTO, making it the first certified CTBT
monitoring station in China. China will continue to promote domestic preparatory
3

work for the implementation of the CTBT. China supports the CD, after reaching
agreement on its comprehensive and balanced program of work, to start the
negotiation on a Fissile Materials Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT) at an early date, on the
basis of the Sharmon Report (CDI1299) and the mandate contained therein, while
firmly opposes setting up new platforms for such a negotiation.
-

With regard to transparency and confidence-building measures, China has
published several white papers to enunciate its nuclear strategy and policy of
utilizing nuclear weapons. China has maintained dialogue and consultations with
other four nuclear-weapon States on the issues such as the confidence-building
measures and the implementation ofthe review outcomes of the NPT. The P5
Working Group on Glossary of Key Nuclear Terms piloted by China has
published its first phase outcome at the 2015 NPT RevCon, and China would like
to take lead the second phase of the Group.

Mr. Chairman,
China's principled position on nuclear disarmament is essentially in line with the
purposes of negotiations on "The Nuclear Weapon Ban Treaty". China also believes
that nuclear disarmament, which carmot be achieved overnight, must be pressed ahead
in a gradual and incremental way following the principles of maintaining global
strategic stability and undiminished security for all. Relevant process must be
advanced within the existing international disarmament and non-proliferation
mechanism. Even though China has decided not to participate in the negotiations,
China's adamant support for a final comprehensive ban on and total destruction of
nuclear weapons remains unchanged. China would keep in touch with relevant parties
in this regard.
Mr. Chairman,
China, as always, will consistently make joint and unremitting efforts with
international community in promoting nuclear disarmament process and reducing the
risks of nuclear war. The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on the
issue of nuclear disarmament which elaborates China's relevant positions. We hope
the elements contained therein will be reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

4

