Statement by Chinese Delegation
on Nuclear Disarmament
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
(Geneva, April 25, 2013)

Mr. Chairman,
Averting the danger of a nuclear war, cessation of the nuclear arms
race and taking effective measures in the direction of nuclear
disarmament are important objectives of the NPT.
Since the 8th Review Conference of the NPT in 2010, international
consensus on nuclear disarmament is getting stronger. The Action Plan in
the Final Document of the 8th RevCon is being implemented, the new
cycle of review process has started smoothly and the process of nuclear
disarmament has achieved some progress. Meanwhile, it should be
pointed out that nuclear disarmament is sensitive and complicated, which
cannot be achieved overnight. There is still a long way to go to realize the
objective of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons and to achieve a world without nuclear weapons. All parties
should continue to uphold a new thinking on security featuring mutual
trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination, and make joint efforts in
the direction of complete elimination of nuclear weapons. We would like
to take this opportunity to share our views on how to comprehensively
implement the Action Plan in the Final Document of the 8th RevCon and
how to promote nuclear disarmament process under current situation.
Firstly, the principles of maintaining global strategic balance and
stability and undiminished security for all should be upheld. Nuclear
disarmament and the international strategic security situation are closely
related. Maintaining global strategic balance is the important premise for
progress in nuclear disarmament. Countries with the largest nuclear
arsenals should continue to make drastic reductions of their nuclear
weapons in a verifiable and irreversible manner. The development of
missile defense systems that disrupt global strategic balance and stability
should be abandoned, so as to create favorable international strategic
1

security environment for sustainable nuclear disarmament process.
Secondly, the Action Plan adopted by the 2010 RevCon should be
strictly implemented. The Action Plan had formulated a detailed roadmap
for the international nuclear disarmament process. This is an important
agreement reached by all States Parties through hard negotiations. The
current priority is to implement the Action Plan in a comprehensive and
balanced manner and to steadily promote the nuclear disarmament
process. Any misinterpretation or reopening the negotiation of the Action
Plan will disturb its implementation, which will not be conducive to
realizing all the objectives set by the 8th RevCon.
Thirdly, the role of nuclear weapons in the national security policy
should be reduced, so as to create favorable international environment to
promote nuclear disarmament. Nuclear-weapon states should abandon the
nuclear deterrence policy based on the first use of nuclear weapons and
conclude a treaty on not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against
each other. Furthermore, the nuclear-weapon states should also undertake
unequivocally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and to conclude
international legal instruments without delay in this regard at the
Conference on Disarmament. Nuclear-weapon states should respect the
status of the nuclear-weapon-free zones, duly assume relevant obligations
in a legally-binding manner, especially undertaking not to use or threaten
to use nuclear weapons against nuclear-weapon-free zones. Meanwhile,
the international community should work together to promote and
facilitate efforts to build new nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Fourthly, the existing multilateral disarmament mechanisms should
be maintained. Such existing institutions as the Conference on
Disarmament (CD), the UN Disarmament Commission have provided
appropriate venues for addressing nuclear disarmament issues.
Establishing new mechanisms to deal with nuclear disarmament will only
undermine the authority of existing ones, divert limited resources, and
cannot guarantee the participation of all major stakeholders. The CD is
the single and most appropriate forum for the negotiations of the FMCT.
The CD should start the negotiation of FMCT which will be participated
by all the relevant parties and start substantive work on nuclear
2

disarmament, PAROS and NSA at an early date.
Mr. Chairman,
As a nuclear-weapon state, China has never evaded its due
responsibilities in nuclear disarmament and has consistently stood for and
advocated the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear
weapons. China has adhered to the policy of no-first-use of nuclear
weapons at any time and under any circumstance, and has made the
unequivocal commitment that we will unconditionally not use or threaten
to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states or
nuclear-weapon-free zones. China has never deployed nuclear weapons
on foreign territory. China has never taken part and will never take part in
any form of nuclear arms race, and will continue to keep its nuclear
capabilities at the minimum level required for national security.
China always respects and supports efforts of non-nuclear-weapon
states to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the states of the region concerned.
China supports the endeavors of ASEAN countries and five Central Asia
countries in promoting the establishment of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
in Southeast Asia and Central Asia respectively. We support further
consultations among relevant countries to resolve outstanding issues
related to the relevant Protocols. To establish the Middle East Zone
Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction is
conducive to mitigating existing regional tensions, promoting regional
peace and stability, and strengthening the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. China always supports relevant countries’
efforts in promoting the establishment of Middle East Zone Free of
Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of Mass Destruction. China is
regretful that an International Conference on the Establishment of a
Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons of
Mass Destruction was unable to be convened in 2012 as required by the
Action Plan of 2010 NPT RevCon. We hope that relevant parties could
bridge the differences through dialogue and consultations, and convene
this conference at an early date in 2013. China will, together with relevant
parties, continue to make our own contribution to the realization of this
goal. Last September, China, together with other nuclear-weapon states
3

issued a joint statement, reassuring Mongolia’s nuclear-weapon-free
status and related security assurance provided to Mongolia.
China is dedicated to international nuclear disarmament. In 67th
UNGA, China continued to vote in favor of resolution 67/34 entitled
‘Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world’, resolution 67/46 entitled
‘Decreasing the operational readiness of nuclear weapons systems’,
resolution 67/64 entitled ‘Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of
Nuclear Weapons’, and resolution 67/29 entitled ‘Conclusion of effective
international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons’.
Mr. Chairman,
In recent years, China and other nuclear-weapon states have convened
a series of conferences on the implementation of the outcome of NPT
review process. Last week, the new round of P5 Conference was
convened in Geneva. Aimed at promoting three pillars of NPT, namely
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, the five states exchanged views on a wide range of issues
including global strategic balance, NPT report, the work of CD and etc.
The conference has yielded positive results. The P5 Working Group on
Glossary of Definitions for Key Nuclear Terms, chaired by China,
successfully convened its first Experts’ Meeting in Beijing last September.
So far, the P5 experts have reached a preliminary agreement on a list of
key nuclear terms and will continue their work on defining these nuclear
terms. The exchange of views on nuclear terms and definitions will
promote mutual understanding and contribute to confidence building
among five nuclear weapon states. The P5 have agreed to submit to the
2015 NPT Review Conference the text of glossary on nuclear terms in
Chinese, English, French and Russia. We hope this will also be conducive
to all parties’ implementation of the outcome of NPT review process.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese Delegation has submitted a working paper on nuclear
disarmament which elaborates China’s relevant positions. We hope the
elements contained therein will be reflected in the report of this PrepCom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
4

