
Thank	  you,	  Mr.	  Chairman	  
I	  want	  to	  assure	  you	  of	  my	  delegation’s	  full	  support	  to	  work	  with	  you	  and	  other	  delegations	  to	  advance	  
preparations	  for	  the	  2015	  NPT	  Review	  Conference.	  	  
We	   align	   ourselves	   with	   the	   statement	   delivered	   by	   Japan	   on	   Disarmament	   and	   Non-­‐	   proliferation	  
education.	  	  
At	   the	   beginning	   of	   this	   Preparatory	   Committee,	   we	   listened	   to	   the	   Foreign	   Minister	   of	   the	   Marshall	  
Islands,	   Hon.	   Tony	   de	   Brum,	   who	   eloquently	   recalled	   his	   own	   experience	   with	   nuclear	   tests,	   and	  
reminded	  us	  of	  the	  catastrophic	  humanitarian	  and	  environmental	  impact	  of	  any	  use	  of	  nuclear	  weapons.	  	  
Nuclear	   weapons	   do	   not	   respect	   national	   borders.	   Both	   the	   Oslo	   and	   Nayarit	   Conferences	   on	   the	  
Humanitarian	   Impact	   of	   Nuclear	   Weapons	   reaffirmed	   that	   no	   state	   or	   international	   organization	   has	   the	  
capacity	  to	  successfully	  address	  and	  provide	  humanitarian	  assistance	  and	  protection	  in	  case	  of	  a	  nuclear	  
blast.	   Moreover,	   these	   conferences	   demonstrate	   the	   increasing	   will	   of	   states	   to	   make	   substantial	  
3	  
	  

progress	   on	   achieving	   a	   nuclear-­‐weapon-­‐free	   world.	   We	   call	   on	   all	   states	   to	   participate	   in	   the	   upcoming	  
conference	  in	  Vienna.	  
Mr.	  Chairman,	  
Despite	  being	  a	  key	  instrument	  in	  strengthening	  international	  peace	  and	  security,	  the	  NPT	  continues	  to	  
face	  many	  challenges.	  Costa	  Rica	  would	  like	  to	  point	  out	  some	  of	  its	  major	  obstacles.	  On	  one	  hand,	  the	  
“step-­‐by-­‐step”	   approach	   has	   failed	   to	   meet	   the	   objectives	   of	   the	   Treaty.	   This	   approach	   has	   not	   yet	  
achieved	   the	   entry	   into	   force	   of	   the	   Comprehensive	   Test	   Ban	   Treaty	   (CTBT)	   or	   the	   initiation	   of	  
negotiations	   for	   a	   fissile	   material	   cut	   off	   treaty	   (FMCT),	   let	   alone	   the	   requirement	   of	   elimination	   of	  
nuclear	  weapons.	  	  	  
And,	  on	  the	  other	  hand,	  the	  continuous	  lack	  of	  the	  full	  implementation	  of	  the	  2010	  Action	  Plan,	  the	  13	  
practical	   steps	   resulting	   from	   the	   2000	   Review	   Conference,	   and	   ongoing	   delays	   by	   nuclear-­‐weapon-­‐
states	  in	  meeting	  their	  Article	  VI	  obligations	  continue	  to	  impede	  the	  achievement	  of	  the	  Treaty’s	  main	  
objective.	  	  
To	  respond	  to	  these	  challenges,	  and	  considering	  the	  Conference	  on	  Disarmament’s	  nearly	  two-­‐decade	  
paralysis,	  last	  year,	  the	  General	  Assembly	  approved—by	  an	  overwhelming	  majority—resolution	  67/56,	  
through	   which	   an	   Open-­‐Ended	   Working	   Group	   (OEWG)	   was	   created	   to	   advance	   the	   multilateral	  
negotiations	  on	  nuclear	  disarmament.	  	  
Costa	   Rica	   had	   the	   honor	   of	   presiding	   over	   the	   Open-­‐Ended	   Working	   Group	   through	   our	   Permanent	  
Representative	   in	   Geneva,	   Ambassador	   Manuel	   Dengo.	   The	   proposals	   discussed	   in	   the	   OEWG,	   and	  
presented	   to	   the	   United	   Nations	   General	   Assembly	   in	   the	   OEWG	   consensus	   report,	   provide	   practical	  
approaches	   to	   overcoming	   the	   deadlock	   in	   the	   Conference	   on	   Disarmament	   in	   order	   to	   commence	  
multilateral	   negotiations	   to	   achieve	   a	   nuclear	   weapon-­‐free	   world.	   Thus,	   there	   are	   now	   no	   reasons	   for	  
not	  initiating	  such	  negotiations.	  	  
As	   long	   as	   nuclear	   weapons	   exist,	   Mr.	   Chairman,	   the	   risk	   of	   accidental	   or	   unauthorized	   use	   of	   such	  
weapons	  persists.	  Let	  us	  not	  forget	  that	  the	  use	  or	  threat	  of	  use	  was	  affirmed	  by	  the	  International	  Court	  
of	   Justice	   (ICJ)	   in	   its	   1996	   Advisory	   Opinion,	   as	   generally	   in	   violation	   of	   international	   law,	   and	   that	   there	  
is	  an	  unconditional	  obligation	  to	  achieve	  their	  complete	  elimination.	  	  
Alarmingly,	   the	   world	   has,	   on	   several	   occasions,	   been	   very	   close	   to	   a	   nuclear	   weapon	   detonation,	   either	  
due	  to	  error	  or	  miscalculation.	  This	  demonstrates	  that	  since	  the	  NPT’s	  entry	  into	  force,	  the	  international	  
community	  has	  not	  been	  able	  to	  reduce	  the	  nuclear	  threat.	  	  
Costa	  Rica	  firmly	  believes	  that	  the	  humanitarian	  paradigm	  must	  be	  the	  driving	  force	  behind	  our	  efforts	  
to	  achieve	  the	  complete	  elimination	  of	  nuclear	  weapons.	  Reliance	  on	  nuclear	  weapons	  for	  security	  and	  
deterrence	  purposes	  must	  be	  renounced	  and	  the	  rejection	  of	  nuclear	  weapons	  must	  be	  reinforced.	  	  
Furthermore,	   it	   is	   imperative	   that	   we	   strengthen	   the	   role	   of	   international	   law	   in	   nuclear	   disarmament	  
and	  non-­‐proliferation.	  For	  Costa	  Rica,	  our	  only	  weapon	  is	  international	  law.	  
It	  is	  within	  this	  context	  that	  we	  would	  like	  to	  stress	  on	  the	  following	  points:	  
•

•

The	   objective	   must	   be	   the	   complete	   and	   universal	   prohibition	   and	   elimination	   of	   nuclear	  
weapons	   under	   strict	   and	   effective	   international	   control.	   Costa	   Rica	   and	   Malaysia	   have	  
submitted	  a	  Model	  Nuclear	  Weapons	  Convention,	  as	  well	  as	  other	  working	  papers	  on	  this	  issue	  
to	  previous	  NPT	  Review	  Conferences.	  
Such	   a	   convention	   could	   be	   negotiated	   either	   in	   one	   go,	   or	   be	   achieved	   through	   a	   package	   of	  
agreements.	  One	  interim	  agreement	  could	  be	  a	  universal,	  legally	  binding	  instrument	  on	  negative	  
4	  

	  

•

•

•

•

•

security	   assurances	   in	   order	   to	   build	   and	   strengthen	   mutual	   confidence	   between	   nuclear-­‐
weapon	  states	  and	  non-­‐nuclear-­‐weapon	  states.	  	  
The	  Comprehensive	  Test	  Ban	  Treaty	  must	  enter	  into	  force.	  The	  nuclear	  tests	  conducted	  in	  the	  
Marshall	  Islands	  and	  Central	  Asia	  must	  never	  be	  repeated.	  We	  urge	  those	  States	  in	  Annex	  II	  of	  
the	   Treaty,	   whose	   ratification	   is	   essential	   for	   its	   entry	   into	   force,	   to	   accelerate	   the	   signature	  
and/or	   ratification	   process	   of	   this	   instrument,	   and	   note	   that	   all	   States	   must	   refrain	   from	   nuclear	  
weapon	   test	   detonations,	   other	   nuclear	   explosions,	   or	   any	   other	   relevant	   non-­‐explosive	  
experiments,	  including	  subcritical	  tests.	  
It	   is	   necessary	   to	   advance	   on	   the	   commencement	   of	   discussions	   on	   a	   Fissile	   Materials	   Treaty.	  
The	  decade-­‐long	  paralysis	  of	  the	  Conference	  on	  Disarmament	  (CD)	  has	  been	  a	  major	  hindrance	  
in	   this	   regard.	   We	   thus	   welcome	   the	   progress	   made	   by	   the	   moratoria	   issued	   by	   nuclear-­‐weapon	  
states	  on	  the	  production	  of	  fissile	  material	  for	  weapon	  use.	  We	  also	  welcome	  the	  convening	  of	  
the	  Group	  of	  Governmental	  Experts	  to	  discuss	  elements	  of	  a	  treaty	  banning	  the	  production	  of	  
fissile	   material.	   Costa	   Rica	   regrets	   that	   their	   report	   will	   not	   be	   available	   until	   after	   the	   2015	   NPT	  
Review	  Conference.	  	  
Progress	   made	   in	   the	   reduction	   in	   global	   stockpiles	   of	   nuclear	   weapons,	   including	   the	   New	  
Strategic	   Arms	   Reduction	   Treaty	   by	   the	   United	   States	   and	   Russia,	   has	   been	   a	   step	   in	   the	   right	  
direction.	   However,	   my	   country	   regrets	   that	   the	   majority	   of	   nuclear	   weapon	   reductions	   have	  
been	   of	   non-­‐operational	   warheads	   and	   warheads	   in	   storage.	   We	   therefore	   call	   on	   nuclear-­‐
weapon	  states	  to	  take	  further	  action	  in	  reducing	  their	  operational	  stockpiles	  and	  non-­‐strategic	  
weapons	  in	  a	  transparent,	  verifiable	  and	  irreversible	  manner.	  
We	   express	   our	   total	   rejection	   of	   the	   modernization	   of	   existing	   nuclear	   weapons	   and	  
development	  of	  new	  types	  of	  these	  weapons	  as	  such	  acts	  are	  inconsistent	  with	  the	  obligation	  of	  
nuclear	  disarmament.	  
Finally,	   Costa	   Rica	   would	   like	   to	   stress	   the	   indispensable	   role	   of	   transparency	   and	   accountability	  
in	  nuclear	  disarmament.	  Nuclear-­‐weapon	  states	  must	  respond	  to	  the	  urgent	  call	  referred	  to	  in	  
Action	   5	   of	   the	   2010	   Action	   Plan	   and	   report	   on	   their	   progress	   during	   this	   Preparatory	  
Committee.	   The	   information	   provided	   thus	   far	   remains	   limited	   in	   its	   scope	   and	   does	   not	  
demonstrate	  sufficient	  advancement	  in	  the	  implementation	  of	  this	  Action.	  

	  
Mr.	  Chairman,	  
Costa	   Rica	   strongly	   believes	   that	   nuclear	   weapons,	   like	   other	   weapons	   of	   mass	   destruction,	   must	   be	  
prohibited	   and	   subsequently	   eliminated.	   The	   indefinite	   extension	   of	   the	   NPT	   established	   at	   the	   1995	  
Review	   Conference	   should	   not	   be	   viewed	   as	   justifying	   indefinite	   possession	   of	   nuclear	   weapons.	   We	  
cannot	  postpone	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	  2010	  Action	  Plan	  any	  longer.	  The	  2015	  Review	  Conference	  
must	  therefore	  yield	  concrete	  results	  and	  commence	  negotiations	  to	  adopt	  a	  legally	  binding	  framework	  
for	  the	  achievement	  and	  maintenance	  of	  a	  world	  free	  of	  nuclear	  weapons.	  	  
Thank	  you.	  	  

	  
	  
	  

5	  
	  

