CZECH REPUBLIC

Statement by

Mr. Ladislav STEINHUBEL
First Secretary of the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic
to the UN

at

Third session of the Preparatory Committee to the NPT
Cluster I

New York, 2 May 2014

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
1. At the outset, let me thank you for your excellent- work done so far. The Czech Republic
fully supports the statement delivered on behalf of the EU. It is my honour to draw your
attention to the issues that are of particular importance to my country.
2. We support the implementation of all articles of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, including
nuclear disarmament. However, we are of the view that the longstanding objective of the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons may be achieved only under certain conditions. The
effective functioning of the non-proliferation regime on a global scale coupled with a
powerful verification regime that could provide assurances of irreversibility of nuclear
disarmament are indispensable for a world without nuclear weapons. Therefore, we stress the
need to faithfully implement all steps agreed in the 2010 Action Plan. Promoting the concept
of "building blocks" could lead us to the global Zero as it was proposed by President Obama
in Prague in 2009.
3. The 2010 NPT Review Conference again confirmed that nothing in the Treaty should be
interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all parties to the Treaty to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. This right,
however, goes hand in hand with responsible behaviour of States Parties in terms of abiding
by their non-proliferation obligations, recognised international standards and safeguards
agreements.
4. The final document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference articulated that the Conference
expressed its deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of
nuclear weapons and reaffirmed the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian law. The devastating immediate and
long-term humanitarian impacts of a nuclear weapon detonation are of a clear concern and
that is why we reiterate our unwavering commitment to achieving and maintaining the goal of
a world free of nuclear weapons.
5. It is important that on the way of achieving the final goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons the humanitarian dimension has been recognised as set out in the Action Plan. It is
also important that all nuclear-weapon states have committed to fully respect their existing
commitments with regard to security assurances. In order to maintain and strengthen the NPT
regime, a mutual confidence between nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states is
essential.
6. The Czech Republic, being the first European country to ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear- Test -Ban Treaty (CTBT), would like to reaffirm its support to the process leading to
the entry into force of the CTBT, which will significantly strengthen the international security
architecture based on the NPT. We fully support the efforts of the Provisional Technical
Secretariat (PTS) to further develop the CTBT verification regime as a strong nonproliferation and confidence building instrument.
7. This session of the Preparatory Committee is a suitable occasion to call upon those States
that have not yet signed or ratified the CTBT to do so without delay, in particular the eight
remaining States listed in Annex 2 to the CTBT whose ratification is necessary for its entry

into force . Pending the entry into force of the CTBT, we welcome the moratoria on nuclear
tests, declared also by several States that have not yet ratified the Treaty. Such voluntary
moratoria can however never substitute the legal ban constituted by the CTBT, as they can be
unilaterally revoked at any time.
8. Like the vast majority of UN Member States, we also attach priority to the commencement
and early conclusion of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a legally-binding
treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices. We consequently support the establishment of a relevant Group of
Governmental Experts with a simple mandate allowing for discussions on a nondiscriminatory, multilateral and internationally verifiable treaty and making recommendations
on possible aspects that could contribute to future negotiations of the treaty. A representative
of the Czech Republic actively participates in the work of this expert group. Any positive
steps this group could achieve towards the ban on the production of fissile materials would
carry a good message to the forthcoming 2015 NPT Review Conference.
9. We understand that launching such negotiations is not feasible without consensus on
adopting a Programme of Work of the CD. In this connection we would like to express our
view that this Programme must also include an item on CD membership enlargement. The
Czech Republic as the current chair of the Informal Group of Observer States to the
Conference on Disarmament believes that the enlargement is not only essential to the CD but
also to the international community as a whole. This step could help the CD to regain its
credibility and dispel any doubts to the relevance ofthe CD.
10. It is our strong belief that the implementation of the goals of the NPT need broad public
support and that is why promotion of education on disarmament and non-proliferation should
be always among our priorities. For this reason we cosponsored the Joint Statement on
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Education initiated by Japan.
Thank you for your attention.

(Check against delivery)

