Statement by
H E Dr. Sameh A boulEnein
Deputy Assistant Minister for Disarmament Affairs of
The Arab Republic of Egypt
Before
The First Session of the
Preparatory Committee to the 2015
NPT Review Conference
Cluster I issues: Nuclear Disarmament and
Security Assurances

Vienna, 3 May 2012

Check against delivery

Egypt's Statement
Before the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
For the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, 30 April - 11 May 2012
"Cluster I issuesff(Nuclear Disarmament)

Mr. Chairman,

Nuclear disarmament remains one of Egypt's highest priorities, a priority which
we have constantly promoted throughout the different international disarmament
fora. We stress our concern at the threat to humanity posed by the continued
existence of nuclear weapons, and reaffirm6 that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, which represents the primary objective of the NPT, is the only
guarantee against the use or threat of use of such weapons. This objective is
dependent upon the implementation by the nuclear-weapon States of their
obligations under Article VI and the achievement of universal adherence to the
Treaty. International peace and security can never be attained with the existence
of such weapons.

Egypt associates itself with the working papers on nuclear disarmament
submitted to this session by the Non-Aligned Movement, New Agenda Coalition
and the Arab Group. Indeed, the Arab Group working paper makes several
suggestions of which the most -important is the immediate commencement of
serious negotiations to develop a plan to achieve an overall reduction of the
global stockpile of nuclear weapons of all kinds, and to continue to reduce the
role of nuclear weapons and their importance in military and security policies.

Whilst significant progress has been made to meet the nuclear non-proliferation
objectives of the NPT, limiting the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons

and strengthening non-proliferation measures over the years, the nuclear
disarmament side of the NPT bargain, however, has yet to be realised. The
international community must therefore redouble its efforts to ensure that the
nuclear-weapon States and countries outside the NPT take the requisite steps
towards the speedy, total and final elimination of their nuclear weapons. The
reaffirmation of the commitment to the total elimination of nuclear weapons was
fundamental to the decision, which was adopted without a vote, to indefinitely
extend the NPT in 1995.

The continued possession by nuclear weapon states of nuclear arsenals for
deterrence purposes, the development of new generations of such weapons and
the provision of assistance to states not party to the Treaty thus perpetuating
their non-adherence, as well as the continued deployment of nuclear weapons in
territories of non-nuclear weapon States through nuclear sharing arrangements
of military alliances, undermines the objectives of the Treaty, and the presumed
equality, irrespective of membership in military alliances, among the nonnuclear weapon States.

Mr Chairman,
Egypt expresses deep concern at the continued lack of meaninghi progress in
the field of nuclear disarmament, which could undermine the object and purpose
of the NPT. Egypt reiterates its strong call for a f i l l implementation of the
unequivocal undertaking given by the nuclear-weapon States at the 2000 Review
Conference, and reaffirmed at the 2010 Review Conference, to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament. That
undertaking should be demonstrated without further delay through the hll
implementation of article VI of the Treaty and the outcomes of the 2000 and

20 10 Review Conferences, to advance systematically and progressively towards
a nuclear-weapon-free world as agreed in 2000 and 20 10.
Indeed, the 2000 Review Conference agreed on 13 practical steps and the 201 0
Review Conference agreed on an action plan on nuclear disarmament which
includes concrete steps for the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Accordingly, Egypt strongly calls for prompt and full implementation of the
2000 and 20 10 outcomes.
The negotiations of a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified time frame ending in 2025, including a nuclear
weapons convention, is necessary and should commence without any further
delay.
Egypt continues to associate itself with the NAM Working Paper on the
"Elements for a plan of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons" submitted
to the 20 10 Review Conference, as contained in document
NPT/CONF.201O/WP.47, and calls for its integration into the outcome document
of the 2015 Review Process of the Treaty, as well as its speedy and full
implementation by the nuclear-weapon States of all its measures in accordance
with the proposed timeline and pace that makes up for the time elapsed.
We also remain deeply concerned by the strategic defence doctrines of nuclearweapon States that set out the rationales for the use of nuclear weapons. These
doctrines confirm the continued reliance on nuclear weapons as an integral part
of national security, thereby undermining previous commitments made under the
NPT. Regrettably, nuclear deterrence policies remain a defining characteristic of
the military doctrines of nuclear-weapon States and the military alliances to
which they are party.
Egypt emphasizes in particular the prime importance of and the urgent need for
full and prompt implementation of the commitments by nuclear-weapon States

under action (5) of the 201 0 Review Conference "action plan on nuclear
disarmament". In this context, we further recall that nuclear-weapon States
committed to accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear
disarmament, inter alia, through:
(a) rapidly moving towards an overall reduction in the global stockpile of all
types of nuclear weapons;
(b) addressing the question of all nuclear weapons regardless of their type or
their location as an integral part of the general nuclear disarmament process;
(c) further diminishing the role and significance of nuclear weapons in all
military and security concepts, doctrines and policies;
(d) discussing policies that could prevent the use of nuclear weapons and
eventually lead to their elimination, lessen the danger of nuclear war and
contribute to the non-proliferation and disarmament of nuclear weapons;
(e) considering the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States in further
reducing the operational status of nuclear weapons systems in ways that
promote international stability and security;
(f) reducing the risk of accidental use of nuclear weapons; and
(g) further enhancing transparency and increase mutual confidence.
Moreover, Egypt calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to submit comprehensive
substantive reports about their undertakings under action (5) of the 2010 Review
Conference "action plan on nuclear disarmament" to the Preparatory Committee
in 20 14, in order to enable the 20 15 Review Conference to take stock and
consider the next steps for the full implementation of article VI of the Treaty in
realization of the objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Also under the 20 10 Action Plan, the nuclear-weapon States were encouraged to
agree as soon as possible on a standard reporting form and to determine the
appropriate reporting intervals for the purpose of voluntarily providing standard
information without prejudice to national security. Furthermore, they were also
required to submit regular reports, within the framework of strengthened review

process for the Treaty, on the implementation of the 201 0 Action Plan. No
evident progress has been made in this regard,
Egypt also recalls that the 2010 Action Plan re-emphasized the commitment to
apply the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in relation to
nuclear disarmament measures,
Mr Chairman,
Egypt recalls that the 2010 Review Conference reaffirmed and recognized the
legitimate interest of all non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty in
receiving unequivocal and legally binding security assurances from the nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. Receiving
such security assurances is a legitimate right as well as the security interest of all
non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty.

Accordingly, we are of the view that pending the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, as the only absolute guarantee against the threat or use of nuclear
weapons, nuclear-weapon States should refrain from the threat or use of nuclear
weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty. Egypt
reiterates that efforts to conclude a universal, unconditional and legally binding
instrument on security assurances to all non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Treaty against the threat or use of nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon States
should be pursued as a matter of priority and should be materialized without
further delay.

In closing, it is important to note that this Review Cycle comes with continued
high expectations from peoples around the world to move rapidly towards total
nuclear disarmament, thereby enhancing global peace and security.

In this respect, the role of non-governmental organizations and civil society in
supporting nuclear disarmament is much appreciated.

Before concluding this statement, Egypt cannot omit to refer to the statement
delivered on Wednesday morning by the distinguished representative of
Switzerland on behalf of a number of NPT States Parties, including Egypt, on
the immense humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons. The
diversity of States on whose behalf the statement was delivered, as well as their
positive respective track records in the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, testifies
to a growing concern regarding the lack of progress towards the achievement of
nuclear disarmament.

Any use of nuclear weapons would have a devastating humanitarian impact and
be clearly incompatible with international humanitarian law. Indeed, considering
their devastating impact, no distinction can be made between the possession of
nuclear weapons on the one hand and their deployment and use on the other.

Egypt therefore urges all NPT States Parties to give serious consideration to the
issues raised in the joint statement on the humanitarian dimension of nuclear
disarmament delivered on behalf of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Holy See, Egypt, Indonesia, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria
Norway, the Philippines, South Africa and Switzerland. This statement can only
serve to increase our resolve to exert every effort to bring about the full
implementation of the NPT, and therefore the full elimination of nuclear
weapons at an early date.
Egypt hopes that this first session of the Preparatory Committee succeeds in
moving forward with strong determination to achieve tangible outcomes towards
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.

