EMBASSY
OF THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
VIENNA

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Omar Amer
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt
to the International Organizations in Vienna

Arab Republic of Egypt

The First Session of the Preparatory Committee to the
2020 NPf Review Conference

Cluster I,
Nuclear Disarmament &, Security Assurances
Vienna, May 2017

Check against delivery

T

These actions, undeniably, undermine the NPT and its grand
bargain.
Mr. Chairman,

Since 1968, the international community was relentless
in its drive to rid the world of nuclear weapons.

In 1968, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons called in Article VI to "pursue negotiations in good
faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear
arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament."

In 1995, the NPT Review and Extension Conference
stressed in Decision 2 on Principles and Objectives for Nuclear
Nonproliferation and Disarmament "the determined pursuit
by the Nuclear Weapon States of systematic and progressive
efforts to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate
goals of eliminating those weapons, and by all States of
general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control."

In 1996, the International Court of Justice issued its
advisory opinion on The Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear

Weapons which ruled that nuclear weapons are generally
illegal and that all states that possess them are obligated to
bring to a conclusion negotiations on nuclear disarmament in
all its aspects.

must ensure that both nuclear disarmament and nuclear
nonproliferation objectives are met. It is Egypt's view
therefore, that a future treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons and other explosive devices
necessitates the inclusion of stockpiles of weapon usable
materials in order to ensure that this future treaty would serve
nuclear disarmament and not remain another nonproliferation
measure.

In

this

regard,

we

look

forward

to

the

commencement of the work of the First Session of the High
Level Preparatory Expert Group due to begin in July/August
2017 in Geneva.
Mr. Chairman,

The 2010 Review Conference reaffirmed the legitimate
interest of all non-nuclear weapon States parties to the Treaty
in receiving unequivocal and legally binding security
assurances from the Nuclear Weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons. We are of the view that
pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, NWS must
refrain from the threat of use of nuclear weapons against any
non-nuclear weapon state parties to the NPT. Egypt
encourages the pursuit to conclude a universat unconditionat
and legally binding instrument on security assurances to all
non-nuclear weapon States parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,

The lack of progress in implementing Article VI of the
NPT and the growing frustration with nuclear weapon States

