Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
First session, Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Agenda item 6; cluster I issues
Statement by Finland
Ambassador Pasi Patokallio, Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland

Mr Chairman,
Finland fully subscribes to the statement by the European Union heard earlier today in this
debate. I will make some additional remarks in our national capacity.
Article VI of the NPT provides a permanent and universally recognized framework for pursuing
nuclear disarmament. It brings together all States Parties is their common quest to achieve a
world without nuclear weapons. Reaching this objective requires practical, verifiable and
irreversible steps by the nuclear-weapon states, whether parties to the NPT or not. Reaching
that goal thus places on them a special responsibility. At the same time, all States Parties can
and must contribute by effectively implementing their obligations under the NPT as a whole.
Everyone on the planet recognizes that, as long as nuclear weapons exist, any use of nuclear
weapons would have catastrophic consequences. Nuclear weapons are weapons but their
destructive potential makes them unique, and therefore makes them a unique source of
concern also for our citizens.
Verification is indispensable in any disarmament agreement. Verification is needed to instill
confidence in that disarmament commitments will actually be fulfilled. Finland was one of the
original sponsors of the UN resolution on nuclear disarmament verification put forward by
Norway. We will participate actively in its follow-up. We see it as an initiative where nuclearweapon states and those non-nuclear-weapon states are working together in partnership on an
issue that is important to both.
Starting negotiations on a treaty capping production and stockpiling of fissile material continues
to be a key priority for Finland. We welcome the establishment of the expert preparatory
group. We expect it to make concrete and realistic recommendations on the way forward.

Non-strategic nuclear weapons are not covered by any legally binding, verifiable international
arrangement. This is a normative gap that needs to be addressed. Finland has commissioned a
UNIDIR study on how arms control could contribute to lessening the danger posed by these
particular weapons. We will come up with concrete ideas of our own for more transparency
and confidence building in this respect during the present NPT review cycle.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test San Treaty (CTST) remains another priority for
Finland. While a de facta moratorium on nuclear weapon tests exists and is nearly universal, to
endure the CTST must be put on a permanent legal footing.
The exception to the near-universal rule remains of course the DPRK. Its conduct is increasingly
irresponsible and poses an increasing threat to regional and international peace and security.
Finland condemns the nuclear and missile tests by the DPRK. We call upon the DPRK to end
immediately its illegal and destabilizing nuclear and missile programs and to adhere to
international norms and to comply with all the relevant UN Security Council resolutions. All the
States Parties to the NPT must take a stand against the DPRK's unacceptable conduct.
Mr. Chairman,
The present review cycle of the NPT provides all States Parties an opportunity to reaffirm their
obligations under the Treaty, including their Article VI obligations, and to work together
constructively to advance nuclear disarmament and all the goals of the Treaty in the interests of
global security and stability. Let us now seize that opportunity.

