Check against delivery

Statement by
Ambassador Päivi Kairamo
Permanent Representative of Finland to the UN in Geneva
Finland’s Statement
NPT PrepCom 2013
Cluster 1
Mr Chairman,
Finland fully aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union earlier.
The NPT remains the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament regime. Finland is fully committed to work to strengthen the NPT. Finland
supports the outcome of the NPT Review Conference of 2010. In the current review
cycle, we should make good use of the momentum resulting from the 2010 Conference
and do our utmost to implement the Action Plans agreed at the Conference.
The entry-into-force of the New START Treaty is a major achievement. Finland
welcomes the effective implementation of the Treaty that is a remarkable step forward
in nuclear disarmament. It is important to continue disarmament efforts in line with the
NPT.
We consider that especially important would be the reductions in tactical - or nonstrategic - nuclear arsenal and inclusion of these weapons in a legally binding, verifiable
international treaty system. Today, no treaty arrangements limit tactical nuclear
weapons, even though the threshold for their use is lower and the danger for their
proliferation and falling into the hands of terrorists is greater than in the case of
strategic weapons. The reduction and elimination of tactical nuclear weapons would
strengthen security in Europe and would positively impact on international security as a
whole. Transparency and information exchange as well as other confidence-building
measures would be important first steps. In this context, Finland would like to associate
itself with the NPDI working paper on non-strategic nuclear weapons.
In nuclear disarmament, efforts of all states possessing nuclear weapons are needed.
We welcome the cooperation of P5, the five nuclear weapon states recognized by the
NPT, and their efforts to implement the conclusions of the NPT Review Conference of
2010 and the adopted Action Plan. We hope the P5 continue this well started
cooperation and produce good results for the 2015 Review Conference.

Mr Chairman,
As a longstanding member of the Friends of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty,
Finland is committed to continue promoting the entry-into-force of this very important
Treaty. We would like to commend those countries that have recently signed and
ratified the CTBT, such as the most recent signature of Niue and recent ratification of
Chad. We urge all signatories to ratify the treaty as soon as possible. The treaty has
already become a de facto norm in which most states abide by moratoriums on nuclear
weapon tests. However, Finland wishes to underline that moratoriums cannot be a
substitute to a global ban. The Vienna Group of 10 (Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, and Sweden) , in which Finland is
an active member have provided a working paper on the CTBT.
The next logical step in nuclear disarmament would be a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty.
We call on the Conference on Disarmament to start negotiations on such a treaty
without delay. A Group of Governmental Experts that will be established by the UN
General Assembly resolution 67/53, can contribute to defining the necessary elements
for a FMCT.
Mr Chairman,
The humanitarian impacts of the use of nuclear weapons would be most catastrophic
and indiscriminate. Such weapons should never be used. In our view, a nuclear-weaponfree world is a far-reaching goal, but a self-evident one. We cannot afford to lose any
time in our efforts towards this important goal.
I thank you, Mr Chairman.

