Mr Chairman,
Let me first congratulate you on your election and on the way you are conducting our work. I wish to assure you our support in your task of guiding this Main Committee I to a successful conclusion.
I am pleased to take the floor today on non-strategic nuclear weapons, issue in which Fin lard has attached active interest in the NPT context since 1995.
Mr Chairman,
The results of the 2000 Review Conference were encouraging, including the question of non-strategic nuclear weapons, as mentioned in the Final Document.
The working papers, statements and discussions in the three Preparatory Committees for this Review Conference have shown a broad recognition of the need for serious and substantial deliberations on the issue. There are a lot of elements in all those contributors that Finland can support.
I would like to express our appreciation to all those contributions and associate our views to those expressed by the European Union. All statements made during the process are useful and form a good basis in drafting the Final Document and in creating a successful outcome of this Conference
Mr Chairman,
The 1991-92 US-Russian Presidential declarations created a basis for unilateral reductions of the holdings of tactical nuclear weapons. The commitments and useful information given later strengthened the positive expectations of the fulfillment of these declarations. We deplore that those commitments have not been fully realized.
Finland regrets that the development in dismantling the tactical nuclear weapons contradicts the declared goals. Those parties, which have specific obligations, have also their special responsibility to increase the openness on the matter as a confidence builc.ing measure.
Mr Chairman,
The actual security situation in the world requires closer international cooperation and underlines the importance of fighting against spread of nuclear weapons, including non-strategic nuclear weapons.
Finland hopes that this Review Process will lead to stronger measures and efforts, not only in the field of nuclear arms control and disarmament process, but also in counter-terrorism and nuclear safety. The issue of non-strategic nuclear weapons has to be taken into consideration in all its aspects.
Let me assure you, Mr Chairman, that Finland continues to do her part together with the European Union and like-minded countries to promote the implementation of the measures agreed upon at the last NPT Review Conference.
Thank You
