
Mr Chairman,
France associates itself with the statement made by the European Union on this
subject.
On behalf of France, I should like to address certain elements with respect to the first
cluster of this Preparatory Committee.
Mr Chairman, we all share the same goal: to tangibly and sustainably progress toward
a safer world for all, in conformity with UNSCR resolution 1887. To this end, and as I
mentioned at the general debate, I would like to stress just how much of a collective
task the Action Plan we adopted at the 2010 Review Conference is, including in its
disarmament aspects, for which we have shared responsibilities. The implementation
ofthe Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the immediate commencement of
the negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treaty are two priorities in this regard and I
will come back to them later.
If we insist on the collective aspect of these responsibilities, this does not mean that
we are seeldng to shun ours. My country knows full well just how much of a particular
responsibility the nuclear-weapon States bear and France fully assumes them.

Firstly, last year, France cut one-third of our deterrent's airborne component,
that is to say of the number of nuclear warheads and missiles that comprise
this component. We also achieved the target announced in 2008 of less than
300 nuclear warheads in total.
Secondly. France held the first P5 follow-up meeting to the NPT Review
Conference in Paris on 30 June and 1 July last year. This meeting built cooperation and confidence among nuclear-weapon States and reaffirmed our
determination to continue to take concrete actions to ensure that States fully
comply with their NPT commitments. The P5 States took forward their
discussions on transparency and mutual confidence, so vital to subsequent
disarmament efforts, including on doctrine and respective nuclear capabilities.
We also examined the concrete, voluntary measures that could be taken to
increase this transparency. We felt it necessary, during these discussions, to
pursue our work on drawing up a glossary of common definitions for key
nuclear terms. A group specialised in terminology and definitions was set up to
this end. The unanimous agreement by the five nuclear-weapon States to meet

again in Washington in the same format in June is a further demonstration of
our shared will to fulfil our commitments and to strengthen the NPT. France,
for its part, will be ready by 2014 to report on the results of its actions and the
progress achieved within the framework of its commitments, notably those
linked to actions 5 and 21 of the Action Plan.
Thirdly. we have made considerable progress with the ASEAN countries
towards finalising a protocol to the Bangkok Treaty on a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South-East Asia. These talks were held up for over ten years.
More generally, I would like to point out that France grants negative security
assurances to nearly one hundred States with respect to the implementation of
nuclear-weapon-free zones. For example, France is party to the relevant protocols
to the Tlatelo1co, Rarotonga and Pelindaba treaties. The hopefully soon-to besigned protocol to the Bangkok Treaty would round out these arrangements. We
are actively working toward this end.
Mr Chairman,
France does not intend to take part in any arms race and we abide by the principle of
strict sufficiency, i.e. we maintain our arsenal at the lowest possible level, compatible
with the strategic environment. Designed only for extreme circumstances of
legitimate defense, the French deterrence is not in contradiction with international
law, as recalled by the ICJ advisory opinion of 8 July 1996.
I feel it useful, to point up the measures taken by my country over the last fifteen
years, because France did not wait the 2010 Review Conference to take action and, in
some areas, lead the way:
We have already dismantled the ground-to-ground component of our nuclear
deterrent and reduced the submarine component by one-third. With the onethird reduction in our deterrent's airborne component, we have halved the
number of nuclear warheads in fifteen years and we have been the first country
to announce the total number of nuclear warheads we have in our possession,
which now stand at less than 300;
We were the first nuclear-weapon State to ratify, along with the United
Kingdom, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty fourteen years ago
today and to dismantle all our nuclear test sites;
We stopped producing plutonium in 1992 and uranium in 1996 for use in
nuclear weapons and dismantled the corresponding facilities, representing a
financial effort of €6 billion. Some of you visited the Pierrelatte and Marcoule
sites, and observed the irreversible nature of the dismantlement operations
achieved. We call on all the countries concerned, pending the conclusion of a
fissile material cut-off treaty, to comply with an immediate moratorium on
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons, as France already does it.
Such is not just words and statements, but tangible measures in line with our
commitments under Article VI of the NPT.

Mr Chairman,
It is useful to recall that pursuant to Article VI of the NPT, nuclear disarmament is
placed within the framework of general and complete disarmament, which implies it
should not lead to an arms race in other areas. It should contribute to strengthening
international stability, not lead to less collective security. Turning to biological
weapons, I welcome the success of the Review Conference on the Biological Weapons
Convention, which has given us a road map for the next five years. And on the subject
of conventional weapons, my country played an important role in the success of the
Oslo process to ban the cluster munitions, bearing in mind their humanitarian
consequences.
As I have already mentioned before, the implementation of the Action Plan concerns

all States parties to the NPT.
I welcome, in this respect, Indonesia's ratification of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. Following the adoption of the CTBT that places a qualitative limit to
the development of nuclear weapons, and whose entry into force is more urgent than
ever, working on imposing a quantitative limit through negotiating at the Conference
on Disarmament a treaty prohibiting the production of fissile material for use in
nuclear weapons or other explosive devices is a priority. This is an indispensable step.
Mr Chairman,
The impasse at this conference gives cause for deep concern. This concern is shared
by the P5, which hold regular consultations on how to resume these talks on the basis
of the CD/1864 Programme of Work, which remains to date the only programme
adopted by the conference in fifteen years.
The launch of these negotiations is an urgent need pointed up by Action 15 of the
Final Document of the Review Conference and called for by United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1887 and the General Assembly's related resolution.
Mr Chairman,
Disarmament relies first and foremost on mutual confidence among States and on the
general perception of security. It can not be decided while disregarding the strategic
context in which we live. The current proliferation crises obviously have a very
negative impact on the general security context and this is the reason why it is
indispensable to respond to them with great determination.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

