
Cluster I: NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT

Mister Chairman,

France fully adheres to the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to add some remarks in a national capacity.

1/ France fully complies with its commitments under Article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation

of Nuclear Weapons. France does so through a progressive and

pragmatic approach, which is the only realistic way so as to promote regional and
international stability, based on undiminished security for all.

We share the ultimate goal of totally eliminating nuclear weapons, when the strategic context
allows. We are working in all fields to create an environment conducive to achieving these
objectives.

Since the end of the Cold Was, my country has talrnn considerable unilateral measures: the
detargeting of France's nuclear arsenal; the ineversible dismantling of our production
facilities of fissile material for nuclear weapons ; total disarmament of the grolmd-to-ground
nuclear component; reduction of the airborne and sea-based components by one third;
ineversible

dismantling of the test site in the Pacific; and the ratification of the

Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). This exemplary record demonstrates our
sincere commitment to nuclear disarmament through concrete measures.

It was possible to take such steps considering the international strategic context following the

Cold War, which enabled confidence to be restored and tensions to be reduced. In today's
strategic environment that has once more deteriorated, we need to work to recreate the
conditions that enabled such progress in the past.

My country attaches great importance to transparency efforts. It has shown transparency by
giving details about the composition of its nuclear arsenal: cap of 300 weapons overall,
4 nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines, three sets of 16 submarine-borne missiles,
and 54 airborne missiles. France regularly sets out its deterrent doctrine limited to the defence
of vital interests in extreme circumstances of self-defence in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

France also provides negative security assurances to all non-nuclear-weapon States Parties
to the NPT that comply with their non-proliferation commitments. It has supported the
creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Latin America, the Caribbean, the Pacific, Africa
and Central Asia. These commitments were confirmed at the highest level of the French
Republic in February 2015. We hope, moreover, to resume constructive dialogue with all
States concerned on the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in Southeast Asia.

France is, moreover, making considerable technical efforts and implementing strict, rigorous
and effective procedures to guarantee the safety of its nuclear weapons, under the
"government control" mechanism, the principles of which are detailed in the French Defence

Code, which is publicly available.

Mister Chairman,

2) It would be dangerous to believe that it is possible to consider the issues of nuclear
disarmament without taking into account the security context, which is currently marked

by growing regional tensions and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems.

That is why France opposes the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW),
which was hastily negotiated last year in total ignorance of the worsening strategic context
and the role that nuclear deterrence continues to play in preserving international and regional
security and stability, including in Europe and Asia. The TPNW could undermine the NPT as
the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation regime by creating an alternative and
contrary standard. As it dissociates itself from the goal of general and complete disarmament,
which is central to the Article VI of the NPT, the Treaty could lead to a race to develop
conventional capabilities and consequently military escalation. As it is exclusively based on a
humanitarian, and in fact largely moralistic approach, this Treaty deepens divisions and tends
to undermine the very foundations of multilateralism, namely dialogue and cooperation with a
view to reaching consensus. That is why France did not take part in the negotiations of this
instrument and does not intend to accede to it. The TPNW does not bind us and does not
create new obligations.

My country's commitment to nuclear disarmament remains intact. France will continue
its resolute, determined, consensus-based action in service of nuclear disarmament,
supporting effective disarmament measures that do not undermine international stability and
within the legitimate fora for disarmament. That is currently the only effective and
responsible method.

The entry into force of the CTBT is a priority in this respect. France calls on all States who
have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT. We welcome the adoption of United
Nations Security Council Resolution 2310, co-sponsored by France, which endorses the
national moratoria declared by the five nuclear-weapon States and reaffirms that the
simulation programmes respect the fundamental obligations of the CTBT. The effectiveness
of the CTBTO verification system, which is being constantly strengthened, is unanimously
acknowledged.

The negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) at the Conference on
Disarmament, based on document CD/1299 and the mandate contained therein, is also an
essential and iITeplaceable step towards a world without nuclear weapons. An FMCT will
prevent the quantitative development of nuclear arsenals. At a time when the spectrum of a
new arms race looms, the relevance of such an instrument remains total. France will continue

to participate actively and substantially in the FMCT High-Level Expert Preparatory Group,
the second session of which will be held in Geneva in a few weeks' time.

Discussions on the technical challenges related to verification of nuclear disarmament
between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States are also useful to help
enhance mutual understanding and build confidence among States Parties to the NPT. That is
why France participates actively in the technical work of the International Partnership for
Nuclear Disarmament Verification (IPNDV). France also supported UN General Assembly
Resolution 71/67 establishing a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on the role of
verification in advancing nuclear disarmament, which will begin its work in a few days. We
hope that as many States as possible will support these various and very promising processes.

Moreover, the United States and Russia still possess almost 90% of global nuclear weapons
stockpiles. These two countries need to continue their reduction efforts, including after 2021
when the New Start Treaty expires.
Mister Chairman,

Nuclear disarmament cannot be decreed - it must be built, with patience, perseverance and
realism. Nuclear disarmament can only progress through a cooperative approach, striving for
consensus and fully recognizing everyone's security concerns. It is in this constructive spirit
that France looks forward to working in the run-up to the 2020 Review Conference.

Thank you for your attention.

