CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY!

Statement by the Federal Republic of Germany at the First
Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Vienna 2 – 12 May 2017
Cluster I (Nuclear Disarmament and Security Assurances)

Mr. President,

First of all, I align myself with the statement by the European
Union.
Over the past years, and in particular since the last Review
Conference in 2015, most of the countries members to the
United Nations have been engaged in long and often controversial debates about how to make better progress in nuclear
disarmament. Inspired and guided by the overall goal of
“global zero”, of a world without nuclear weapons, no effort
was spared to search for common ground on how to best
advance nuclear disarmament, including in the Open-ended
Working Group on Nuclear Disarmament which met in

Geneva in 2016 and in the last UN General Assembly’s First
Committee. Germany entirely shares the vision of a nuclear
free world and is actively engaged in promoting the nuclear
disarmament process. Consequently, Germany actively
participated in the three Conferences on the humanitarian
impact of nuclear weapons in Norway, Mexico and Austria in
2013 and 2014 and in the work of the Open-ended Working
Group in Geneva last year.
Our collective efforts towards nuclear disarmament entered a
new phase when negotiations of a nuclear weapons’
prohibition treaty began in March in New York. We take note
of the desire of the countries involved in these negotiations
to accelerate progress towards nuclear disarmament.
However, as much as the approach of a nuclear weapons’ ban
seems to be a tempting short-cut , Germany is convinced that
such a path cannot bring us any inch closer to concrete
nuclear disarmament. Germany’s concern with commencing
negotiations on a treaty to legally ban nuclear weapons is not
only that a nuclear ban treaty without the involvement of
nuclear weapon states will be ineffective, but also that it does
not provide for verification mechanisms needed to monitor

that nuclear disarmament measures would indeed be fully
implemented in an irreversible manner
In seeking ways forward towards nuclear disarmament, there
is no alternative to ensuring that nuclear weapon states are
engaged in the process and acknowledging that real progress
can only be made if and when the international security
environment is right.
Another central concern remains the full effectiveness of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
its three pillars one of which is nuclear disarmament. An
immediate "ban" of nuclear weapons without verification
mechanisms or restrictions on the production of fissile
material bears the risk of weakening the NPT also with regard
to its other pillars – contrary to the intention of its
proponents.

For these reasons, Germany has decided to stay away from
the negotiations on a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons. As we stated in the General Debate,
Germany remains convinced that a progressive step-by-step

approach based on the 2010-Action Plan remains the only
realistic and valid roadmap to nuclear disarmament aimed at
achieving concrete results.
Our progressive step-by-step approach has identified
concrete ways aiming for conditions that would allow for the
continuous reduction of nuclear weapons by establishing the
confidence and trust needed for such steps. It focuses on
strengthening the NPT as the central cornerstone of the
international nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
architecture. Implementation of many of the elements of the
Action Plan agreed at the 2010 NPT Review Conference will
be key to making real and substantive progress towards
nuclear disarmament, including:

 Early progress on restricting the production of fissile
material is a shared priority of the international
community. That’s why Germany, together with Canada
and the Netherlands, co-sponsored a General Assembly
resolution launching a new process of diplomatic efforts
towards an FMCT, setting out a high-level FMCT expert
preparatory group in Geneva which will start its work in

July. Thereby, we aim to move forward despite the long
stalemate in the CD in Geneva. We feel reassured about
our approach by the substantive discussions on the issue
which took place in New York in March and would like to
encourage all countries to follow the discussions closely.
The co-sponsors stand ready to facilitate a continuous
and transparent flow of information on the issue.
 It is highly regrettable that the CTBT has not yet entered
into force in spite of the overwhelming support lent to
this goal by both the 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences. The entry into force of the CTBT would be
in the security interest of all states. In the 21st century,
there is no place for nuclear testing! Germany welcomes
the fact that the International Monitoring System has
already proven its effectiveness by detecting nuclear
tests. States Signatories must increase the political will
and provide adequate resources to complete the
verification regime. Germany is proud of being the third
largest contributor to the important work of the CTBTO.

 Another important element of the step-by-step
approach is the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament Verification (IPNDV). IPNDV is aimed at
making progress towards a robust and credible
verification mechanism as an essential element on the
way towards a world without nuclear weapons.
Germany hosted the last IPNDV working group meeting
in Berlin from 6-8 March 2017.
 Germany is also actively engaged in the Nonproliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) whose
“signature approach” is to strengthen the NPT based on
the 2010 Action Plan and its multiple proposals to
advance implementation of the NPT.
It needs to be stressed that more progress towards nuclear
disarmament does not only imply the need for multilateral
disarmament steps, but first and foremost bold steps by
those nuclear weapons states which hold the biggest nuclear
arsenals. Assessments diverge on how much progress has
been achieved: While we welcome the steps that have
already been taken, in particular the substantial reductions of
the global stockpiles of nuclear warheads in the years since

the 2010 Review Conference, there are still too many nuclear
weapons. Much more can be done to increase transparency
of the remaining nuclear arsenals. We call upon the United
States of America and the Russian Federation to renew and
continue their bilateral efforts to constructively engage with
each other in new disarmament talks in order to achieve
further reductions, including talks about the future of the
New START treaty. After all, this is precisely what is required
under Article VI of the NPT according to the reading of this
article by the International Court of Justice in its 1996
Advisory Opinion.
With good reason, the 2010-Action Plan laid emphasis on
transparency. Under the Action Plan, reporting is an
obligation incumbent on all NPT Member States. However, it
is hard to deny that there is a particular responsibility of the
P5 to report, without prejudice to national security, on their
stocks. In the absence of concrete numbers, it is almost
impossible to ascertain whether headway is being made or to
confirm that nuclear stockpiles are not expanding. This
Conference should thus reiterate the crucial importance of

transparency. The Standard Reporting Forms developed by
the NPDI should be revisited in that regard.

As Sam Nunn, William Perry, Henry Kissinger and George
Shultz put it succinctly: “A world without nuclear weapons
will not simply be today's world minus nuclear weapons.” In
other words, effective and verifiable nuclear disarmament
does not take place in a vacuum, but in a concrete security
and political context. For the time being, nuclear weapons are
still being assigned a role in military doctrines. This also
applies to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, of which
Germany is a member.

The 2010 NPT Action Plan is also based on a gradual
approach. In its Action 5, it lists important steps which should
be taken, such as a further reduction of the role of nuclear
weapons in military doctrines or the issue of de-alerting. All
of these measures presuppose trust between partners and a
cooperative setting based on reciprocity. After the illegal
annexation of Crimea by Russia and in the course of the
Ukraine crisis, a lot of trust has been lost. This is also true

with regard to the so-called Negative Security Assurances,
which suffered a heavy blow after the breach of the Budapest
Memorandum, which guaranteed the territorial integrity of
Ukraine. In the present, difficult context, it is also of
paramount importance that disarmament and nonproliferation commitments under existing treaties are
honoured and preserved, including the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which is a crucial element of
Euro-Atlantic security.
In closing, let me say a word on how we can jointly make
progress on nuclear disarmament in this Review Cycle despite
our differences on the need and usefulness of a nuclear
weapons prohibition. Regardless of our individual
perspectives on this Preparatory Committee, I would hope
that we are united by the goal of making this Review Cycle a
successful one for nuclear disarmament based on the many
ideas and suggestions of the 2010 Action Plan. Needless to
say that Germany is also open to discuss ideas how to
supplement it and to update it where necessary.

