

Germany welcomes the decision of the Conference to establish Subsidiary Body I under Main Committee I in order to discuss and consider the practical steps for the systematic and progressive effort to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and paragraphs 3 and 4 c of the 1995 decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament". 
We attach high importance to the work this Subsidiary Body is mandated for by the Conference. According to paragraph 3 and 4 c of the Principles and Objectives, this includes, in particular, discussion and consideration of practical steps for the full realisation of the systematic and progressive efforts by the Nuclear Weapon States to reduce nuclear weapons globally, with the ultimate goal of eliminating those weapons. 
The European Union outlined - and will continue to do so - its thinking on some practical steps, which, to our conviction, contain valuable proposals to this Subsidiary Body. We invite other delegations to give them thorough consideration. Equally, we welcome proposals submitted by the Delegations of Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and Sweden. We regard with interest the practical steps proposed therein. They merit careful study. 
Nuclear disarmament is a difficult step-by-step process. To my country, the principles of transparency, irreversibility, confidence-building and accountability constitute the indispensable framework to further nuclear disarmament. I fully share the words of my French colleague in his statement in Main Committee I: "We must be aware of the changing expectations of the international community and public opinion in their calls for more transparency, dialogue and confidence. In fact, greater attention to these expectations will contribute, without a doubt, to the nuclear disarmament process itself." 
My delegation will on a national basis as well as together with other partners actively contribute to a substantive outcome of the work of this Subsidiary Body.

