PERMANENT MISSION OF REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS, WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

16, Rue de Saint-Jean - 1203 Geneva - Tel. (022) 338 33 50

Statement by
Mr. Husnan Bey Fananie
Member of Parliament of
the Republic of Indonesia

Cluster 1 Issues: Implementation of the provisions
of the Treaty relating to non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons, disarmament and
international peace security

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Geneva, 25 April 2013

C

@

A
i

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, Indonesia associates with the statement made earlier on Cluster 1
issues by the Group of Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement Parties to Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Nuclear disarmament and the realization of a nuclear weapon free world is one
our constitutional mandates. Therefore our commitment to this global agenda is
undiminished.
Mr. Chairman,
More than forty years since the entry into force of the NPT, much remains to be
done in its Treaty implementation. Different priorities among the NPT states parties
have created imbalance in the achievement of the three pillars of nuclear disarmament,
non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Progress is lacking in nuclear
disarmament as compared to the other two pillars.
The step taken by the United States and the Russian Federation to implement
the New Start Treaty that would reduce operationally deployed strategic nuclear
weapons is a positive sign. However, such measure does not substitute on the
importance of multilateral approach and the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and
transparency in dealing with nuclear disarmament.
The nuclear weapon states need to fulfill their obligation under Article VI of the
Treaty and undertake 13 Practical Steps and the 2010 action plan on disarmament of
nuclear weapons, in particular its Action 5, to accomplish total elimination of their
nuclear arsenals.
We would like to stress that the indefinite extension of the Treaty does not imply
the indefinite possession of nuclear arsenals by nuclear weapon states. Any such
assumption is incompatible with the object and purpose of the Treaty, its integrity and
sustainability of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
We are deeply concerned of security policies of the nuclear weapon states
reliance on nuclear weapons based on the doctrine of nuclear deterrence. Therefore we
call on the nuclear weapon states to exclude completely the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons from their military and security doctrines.
Mr. Chairman,
It is with deep dismay that the Conference on Disarmament has been in
stalemate for the last sixteen years. The continuing deadlock in the Conference on
Disarmament reflects the lack of serious commitment to the goal of the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons, as well as other core issues before the Conference.
Multilateral disarmament negotiations could only take place if Member States of the

Conference on Disarmament demonstrate flexibility and political will to agree on a
balanced and comprehensive program of work.
In this context, we look forward to the convening of the High-Level Meeting of the
General Assembly on Nuclear Disarmament in New York on 26 September 2013.
Continued deliberations on the importance of nuclear disarmament and complete
elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war.
To this end, we emphasize the necessity to start negotiations on a phased
program for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, including a Nuclear Weapons
Convention to prohibit their development, production, acquisition, testing, stockpiling,
transfer, use or threat of use, and to provide for their destruction, without further delay.
Turning to the issue of nuclear testing, several countries including Indonesia had
signed and ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. We hope that this
positive trend will solidify the norms against nuclear proliferation and further
development of nuclear weapons.
We call upon the remaining Annex I1 countries, particularly the remaining nuclear
weapon states and other states claiming possession of nuclear weapons to follow suit. It
is regretful that the Treaty which was concluded in 1996 has not yet entered into force.
Mr. Chairman,
In two years time, we are approaching the 2015 NPT Review Conference. In
achieving concrete results, commitment of State Parties for full implementation of the
outcome of 2010 NPT Review Conference and previous outcomes of 1995 and 2000
NPT Review Conferences are strongly urged. lndonesia is ready to continue to work
collectively with all states parties in pursuing the cause of nuclear disarmament.
Thank you.

