Mr. Chairman,
When confronting the challenges of nuclear proliferation, we must view them in a broad security context. We must address the "drivers" of proliferation, the insecurities that motivate particular countries or groups to seek nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
It is clear that nuclear threats have become more dangerous and more complex. We have witnessed the emergence of illicit trade in nuclear technology. More seriously, there is a possibility that extremist or terrorist groups gaining access to nuclear materials and technology. In parallel, nuclear material and technology have become more difficult to control. Energy security concerns and fears of climate change are prompting many countries to revisit the nuclear power option.
The continued existence of about 27,000 nuclear warheads in the hands of de-jure as well as de-facto nuclear weapon states, and the hair trigger alert deployment level of some of these weapons, are also worrisome and constitute a threat to international peace and security.
In order to prevent new states to acquire nuclear weapons, the most realistic step, like in the case of biological and chemical weapons, is to work towards outlawing nuclear weapon once and for all. Outlawing nuclear weapons will not only prevent new states to acquire nuclear weapons as mandated by Article II of the NPT, but also to push nuclear weapons states expedite their commitment and obligations to nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
Since we have adopted the agenda for the 2010 Revcon, we need to continue to move forward to achieve the full realisation and effective implementation of all provisions of the NPT. As part of the strengthened review process, there is a need for the next Revcon to consider principles, objectives and ways in order to promote the full implementation of the Treaty, as well as its universality.
It is important for us to proceed to looking forward as well as looking backward. We should evaluate the results of the period they are reviewing, including the undertakings of the States parties under the Treaty. We must also identify the areas in which, and the means through which, further progress should be pursued in the future.
Since the 2000 NPT Revcon, one of the major issues emerging is the Treaty's compliance and non-compliance. Some states parties claimed that they have fully complied with the Treaty's provisions and others accused that some states have in non-compliance to certain provisions of the Treaty.
One thing we should keep in mind if we want to maintain the integrity and credibility of the NPT. Compliance or non-compliance should be addressed in a non-selective and balanced manner. Pick and choose approach to deal with compliance or non-compliance would only further undermine the Treaty.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman