Statement by Indonesian delegation

at the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 1: Nuclear disarmament

First Session
Vienna, -- May 2012

Mr. Chairman,

At the outset, Indonesia associates with the statement made earlier on Cluster 1
issues by the Group of Member States of the Non-Aligned Movement Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Nuclear disarmament and the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free world is one
of our constitutional mandates. Therefore, our commitment to this global agenda is
undiminished.

Mr. Chairman,

Since the Treaty was established more than 40 years ago, the non-nuclear
weapon states have fulfilled most, if not all, of their non-proliferation obligations by
subscribing to the nonproliferation regime. At the same time, fulfillment of
disarmament obligations under Article VI of the Treaty does not show any promising
progress so far. It is also a matter of great concern to us that the NWS have not

1

undertaken the 13 Practical Steps in the manner that they unequivocally agreed to at the
2000 Review Conference.

The goals of the NPT are advanced only when we all execute our respective
responsibilities. Therefore, unless and until effective, verifiable and irreversible
progress can be made in the field of disarmament, the future of the nonproliferation
regime will always in peril. We must also realize that the gravity of the lack of progress
on nuclear disarmament will undoubtedly undermine the very object and purpose of
the Treaty, which we must never allow to happen.

The need or rather moral demand by the overwhelmingly large majority of the
international community is clear and well-known: total nuclear disarmament. That
said, the international community should not only continue to echo the fear of nuclear
weapons. We must also show -through our actions- that we are absolutely serious in
our pursuit to realize the vision of a nuclear-weapon-free world.

Mr. Chairman,
Despite the successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, it is
regretful to see that the way the action plans on disarmament were implemented are far
from satisfying compared to the implementation of action plans on other pillars, namely
nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

It is now high time for the

Nuclear Weapon States to fulfill their unequivocal commitment toward nuclear
disarmament assumed at the 2010 NPT Review Conference. It is also time for them to
prove that the nuclear-weapon-free world vision, which we fully and consistently share,
is not just rhetoric, but a genuine and wholehearted vision that is operationalized into
actions. As we believe that the three pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing, we also
believe that significant progress in multilateral disarmament would boost significant
progress in other pillars.
2

Indonesia views the new START between the United States and the Russian
Federation as a positive measure. Nevertheless, such measures, however wellintentioned, are unable to answer the international call for the NWSs to undertake
complete nuclear disarmament.

Mr. Chairman,

In 2010, Indonesia and other NAM countries submitted a proposal to the Review
Conference on elements for a plan of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons.
Notwithstanding the successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, it is
regretful to see that the elements were not well reflected in the outcome document. The
proposal was aimed at setting a specified time frame for the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, which include negotiation of a treaty banning nuclear weapons or a nuclear
weapon convention. We continue to believe that, for disarmament commitment to gain
credibility, time-framing disarmament commitment in a specific manner is a necessity.
It is our profound hope that this first session of the Preparatory Committee will provide

a strong basis for the proposal to be taken into consideration by the 2015 NPT Review
Conference.

We are encouraged by this vision of a world free of nuclear weapons and, at least
in our national capacity, we are determined to contribute to making that day come
sooner rather than later. Of course, this kind of rhetoric is needed to inspire a tidal wave
of hope and open up the space for a badly needed renewal of advocacy and action to
abolish nuclear weapons. However, rhetoric alone cannot move "the gearshift" towards
this visionary world: a world free of nuclear weapon. It requires political will to change
a strategic mindset, especially of those who own the nuclear weapons. It requires
practical actions towards genuine multilateral negotiation, and the only multilateral
3

negotiation that would lead to a world free of nuclear weapons is negotiation on a
nuclear weapons convention.

Mr. Chairman,
A multilateral and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices is a global agreement
vitally needed to secure the future of nuclear nonproliferation and the disarmament
agenda. Therefore, we are concerned with the fact that since the negotiating committee
was established within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament in 1995, there
has so far been no significant progress toward realizing the treaty.
Indonesia is also concerned by the lack of political will on a wide range of issues
that have been stalling the work in the CD and other parts of the UN disarmament
machinery.
Therefore, our collective effort to make progress in the works of the CD,
including on the issue of a fissile materials treaty, should be refreshed and given new
impetus. We are looking forward to playing an active part toward that goal.

Mr. Chairman,

For its part, and as a continuation of the Indonesian role in pursuing nuclear
disarmament and nonproliferation, Indonesia recently ratified the CTBT. We call upon
the remaining Annex II countries, especially the remaining nuclear weapon states and
other states claiming possession of nuclear weapons to follow suit, for it is they, above
all, who must first and foremost commit to the CTBT.
We continue to view the CTBT as an essential element in our efforts to further
pursue the cause of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Therefore, it is
regretful to see that since the negotiation was concluded in 1996, the Treaty has not yet
entered into force. It is clear that at this particular point of time, for the CTBT to reach
4

its entry into force, it needs refreshed leadership. The two remaining nuclear weapon
states in Annex II could provide this desperately needed leadership by setting example
for the others.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, it is our view that this meeting has a lot to do to ensure
that the positive momentum that was built in 2010 can be sustained, especially on the
nuclear disarmament agenda. Indonesia is prepared to continue to work collectively
with all states parties in pursuing the cause of nuclear disarmament.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

5

