Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, let me congratulate you on your election to chair this very important Committee. Our work here is critical to strengthening the implementation of the NPT, and reaffirming as well as laying down clear steps for realizing a world without nuclear weapons. Indonesia supports you and your bureau in your leadership and facilitating tangible outcomes that will contribute to enhancing peace and security for peoples everywhere.
As a country long committed to actualization of global nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy - the three pillars of the NPT - Indonesia attaches high importance to the two main themes of this Committee.
We hope that the international momentum generated from the positive steps in nuclear disarmament announced by some of the nuclear weapon states (NWS) will be used constructively by all delegations to ensure success here.
On its part, Indonesia will make every effort to contribute in that regard.
Indeed the global nuclear disarmament agenda made little progress in the past and there was an unfortunate deadlock and even regression. But the past must not hold us back. There are signs of optimism indeed. The recent announcements by the US, including to disclose publicly its number of nuclear weapons and how many it has dismantled since 1991 are encouraging. We hope that the other NWS would take similar steps and work to transparently reduce their nuclear arsenals. The emerging signs of progress should be consolidated and capitalized to advance the multilaterally agreed goals for achieving general and complete nuclear disarmament, and making rapid progress in nuclear non-proliferation. In doing so, we must ensure that the international and national actions reinforce the central character of the NPT.
Indonesia is proud of its credentials as a non nuclear weapon state, and for continuing to work actively to promote the cause of total global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We have initiated our process of ratification for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test ban Treaty (CTBT). It is our conviction that nuclear weapon security doctrines have no place in the world, and the international community should instead engage and collaborate for achieving peace and prosperity based on the principles of multilateralism and international law.
We hope that everyone can join in this collective cause, and the NWS will live up to their commitments for attaining complete nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation in an irreversible, transparent and verifiable manner. Some of the statements that we have heard in this respect at the Conference are encouraging, and we welcome them.
The dangers to humanity from the use or the threat of use of nuclear armaments cannot be over emphasized. As long as one nuclear weapon exists, the risk that it can be used by design or accident will remain. Indonesia, therefore, calls on the NWS to continue to build on their positive steps for total nuclear disarmament, and undertake full implementation of the 13 Practical Steps agreed by them. The implementation of all NPT provisions, as well as the commitments and undertakings that were agreed at the 1995 and 2000 NPT Review Conferences is crucial.
It is incumbent on the Member States that they work together intensely to realize a universal nuclear weapons convention containing specified time horizon for complete nuclear disarmament.
And pending the elimination of nuclear weapons all non nuclear weapon states (NNWS) must be given security assurances by the NWS with a multilaterally negotiated legally binding instrument. This is the least that they deserve.
The security assurances to the NNWS, where there are an incentive against the lure of developing nuclear weapons, they are a tangible part of the process towards nuclear disarmament. We recall that in 1995, the NWS had made assurances at the Conference of Disarmament (CD) by offering security assurances to the NNWS, and that the Security Council, in the same year, through Resolution 984 had recognised this legitimate imperative of the NNWS in the context of NPT.
We note that security assurances have been extended through some treaty-based nuclear weapon free zones (NWFZ), which contain protocols that encode security assurances for the NNWS party to those zones. This is welcoming, nevertheless, it offers a very partial solution. Moreover, not all NNWS are covered by the existing treaties on NWFZ. And we should remember that even the entry into force of the existing NWFZs and their Protocols of Accession have not yet been finalized or ratified.
The proposed decision by the present Presidency of the CD to find a common ground for starting negotiations in the CD should be a good opportunity to deal with the security assurances in a transparent and comprehensive fashion, and develop a clear roadmap for their attainment.
It is important to also highlight the role by global civil society in its advocacy for promoting an environment that advances nuclear disarmament and non- proliferation. In this context, we support the March 2010 joint working paper submitted by Japan and the United Nations University on "Disarmament and non-proliferation education: promoting cooperation with civil society towards a world without nuclear weapons/'
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia is also fully cognizant of the risks from the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Whatever is the source of proliferation threat, it should be addressed squarely but without discrimination and double standards. International cooperation in this regard is especially important, and the efforts against nuclear non-proliferation should be carried out on the basis of multilateralism and international law.
We would, however, underscore that cooperation in nuclear energy with the States not party to the NPT does not help the credibility of the Treaty, and sends a discouraging signal to its signatories.
My delegation also underlines the vital importance of Israel to come into the fold of NPT, and place all its nuclear related facilities under the IAEA safeguards according to the UN resolutions. We urge the remaining States outside the Treaty to also join in at the earliest.
The universalisation of the NPT with full execution of its provisions, and eradication of all nuclear weapons is the guarantee that our and the next generation rightly deserves. The time is now to bring to bear our political will to make the commitments reality.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.









 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 2

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT 3

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



