
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear disarmament, a fundamental pillar of the NPT, has the highest priority in the NPT
review cycle. With the adoption of the practical steps in the 2000 NPT Review Conference, in
particular the "unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament under Article VI of the Treaty",
hopes for the implementation of disarmament pillar of the Treaty were renewed. The implementation
of the 13 practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the
Treaty has become instrumental towards the goal of nuclear disarmament. As reaffirmed in the
agreed Action Plan on nuclear disarmament of the 2010 Review Conference, the practical steps
adopted by consensus at the 2000 Review Conference constitute the basis of our deliberations on
nuclear disarmament in the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty. In its Action Plan, the
2010 Review Conference emphasized on the urgent need for the nuclear-weapon States to implement
practical steps to nuclear disarmament agreed to in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference.
The upcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty should consider national
reports of the nuclear-weapon States to be furnished, in accordance with the Actions 5 and 20 of the
2010 Review Conference's Action Plan, with respect to their obligations to implement Article VI of
the Treaty, including measures adopted by them to implement 13 practical steps for the systematic
and progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the NPT and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the 1995
1

decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
Despite the obligations under Article VI of the Treaty and the commitments made by the
nuclear-weapon States at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and their unequivocal
undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenal adopted at the 2000 NPT
Review Conference as well as their commitment made at the 2010 Review Conference to accelerate
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament, developments in the area of nuclear
disarmament have not been promising and do not indicate compliance with disarmament obligations.
Limited reductions of nuclear weapons mostly do not go beyond mere decommissioning. They,
therefore, do not abide by the principle of "irreversibility", which was agreed by the nuclear-weapon
States at the 2000 NPT Review Conference and reaffirmed in the Action 2 of the 2010 Review
Conference's Action Plan.
During the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties~ to the Treaty, the nuclear-weapon States
committed themselves to "the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral
initiatives and as an integral part of the arms reduction and disarmament process". In Actions 3 and 5
of the 2010 Review Conference's Action Plan, the nuclear-weapon States also reaffirmed their
commitment to this end. In spite of that commitment, no practical steps have been taken to reduce
tactical nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon States. Any reduction of nuclear weapons, whether
strategic or non-strategic, should be in a transparent, irreversible and internationally verifiable
manner. Needless to say, such reduction in nuclear weapons can never be a substitute for the main
obligation of the nuclear-weapon States, namely the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Moreover, in the absence of any mechanism to verify the implementation of unilateral,
bilateral and multilateral declarations made or agreements reached regarding the fulfilment of nuclear
disarmament obligations, and in order to assure the international community of the real and
irreversible reduction of nuclear weapons and their elimination, the NPT Review Conference should
establish a standing Committee to ensure implementation of the commitments made with regard to
Article VI obligations.
A real change is needed regarding for the removal of the emphasis on the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence. A review of the nuclear policy of certain nuclear-weapon States shows a reverse trend.
The continued emphasis of Nuclear Posture Review of a certain nuclear weapon State on maintaining
nuclear weapons and the deterrence policy, the plan to spend hundreds of billions of dollars on the
modernization of the nuclear arsenals, constructing new facility for production of new nuclear
weapons, no movement towards ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and
raising new excuses for keeping nuclear weapons in the Nuclear Posture Review, are clear
indications of the continued policy of that State to evade its nuclear disarmament obligation.
The Contrary to the declaratory policy of the UK regarding its commitment to its nuclear
disarmament obligations under the NPT, By replacing and modernizing the Trident nuclear weapons
system which has an estimated cost of 100 billion Euros the UK is launching a nuclear rearmament
rather than nuclear disarmament. This will equip the UK with more destructive nuclear weapons for
killing and destruction of thousands of people. This is in contravention of the UK's international
obligations. The UK's notion of the legitimate use of nuclear weapons adds to the already grave
concerns of the international community regarding the continued existence of nuclear weapons and
2

the risk of their use. I remind the 1996 advisory opinion of the IC] that "there exists an obligation to
pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control."
More worrisome are announcements by France. It has deployed a new nuclear-armed ballistic
missile submarine to its nuclear arsenal. The President of that country was quoted as saying, "French
nuclear forces are a key element in Europe's security". This indicates that France, in defiance of its
international obligations, is seeking new roles for its nuclear forces in order to justify their continued
retention. In so doing, it even resorts to irresponsible methods such as manipulation of intelligence
and frightening its own people to promote programmes that its people would otherwise not support.
Another serious concern is the continuation and expansion of nuclear sharing among the
nuclear-weapon States or with non-nuclear weapon States under military alliances. A regrettable
example in this regard is the agreement signed by France and UK. It is an open secret that France is
the only NPT State party that has categorically rejected the legal obligations for nuclear disarmament
both in word and action, and has tried to invent a new concept of conditional disarmament. French
officials have also tried to divert the attention of international community from their non-compliance
with the NPT by raising baseless allegations against the peaceful nuclear program of the others
without presenting substantiated evidence.
Continued lack of transparency regarding the nuclear activities of the nuclear-weapon States
is a matter of serious concern to the States Parties to the Treaty.
The Preparatory Committee and the 2015 NPT Review Conference have the task of
addressing the concerns of the non-nuclear-weapon States emanating from the development and
deployment of new nuclear weapons and their means of delivery and alleviating these concerns by
considering a decision on the prohibition of the development, the modernization and the production
of any new nuclear weapons, particularly mini-nukes, as well as a ban on the construction of any new
facility for the development, deployment and production of nuclear weapons and their means of
delivery in home and foreign countries.
While issues such as terrorism, non-proliferation and the possible role of the terrorist groups
in proliferation should duly be dealt with, it is very unfortunate that these issues are abused by certain
nuclear-weapon-States on one hand, as pretexts to preserve their nuclear weapons and on the other
hand justify imposing more restrictions and constraints against some members of the Treaty.
The NPT review process should be able to reiterate once again its unconditional call for the
full implementation of the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, and must assess the implementation of the 13 practical
steps agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference and the Action Plan on nuclear disarmament adopted
by consensus at the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
The Parties to the Treaty, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, should engage in good faith
in substantive work of the Review Conference for the prompt and meaningful implementation of
obligations under the Treaty, including Article VI, and the commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and
2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty.
The international community cannot wait forever to witness the total elimination of nuclear
weapons. To this end, the 2015 NPT Review Conference should adopt a clear time frame with a
3

target date for the full implementation of Article VI, namely 2025 as proposed by the Non-Aligned
Movement.
In this context, Iran is of the firm belief that early negotiations on a nuclear weapons
convention shall be started in the Conference on Disarmament within a comprehensive and balanced
program of work which should deal equally with four core issues. In this regard, Iran reiterates its
call for the establishment, as the highest priority and as soon as possible, of an ad hoc committee
with a negotiating mandate on nuclear disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament. Such
negotiations must lead to the legal prohibition, once and for all, of the possession, development and
stockpiling of nuclear weapons by any country and provide for the destruction of such inhumane
weapons. In this context, the IAEA should fulfil its responsibility in nuclear disarmament as
stipulated in its Statute.
Until the conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention, the nuclear-weapon States must fulfil
their obligations under the NPT and refrain from:
•
Any kind of development of and research on nuclear weapons;
•
Any threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States;
•
Any modernization of nuclear weapons and their facilities; and
•
Deployment of nuclear weapons in the territories of other countries.
As a first step to address the issue of illegality of use or threat of use, Iran believes that, the
Review Conference should adopt a decision by which the Conference "decides that the threat or use
of nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the Treaty shall be prohibited".
It is worth mentioning that once again the General Assembly, at its sixty-sixth Session,
adopted resolution (66/28) entitled "Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the
1995,2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the NPT", in which it called, inter alia,
for practical steps to be taken by all the nuclear-weapon States that would lead to nuclear
disarmament in a way that promotes international stability and, based upon the principle of
undiminished security for all. These required measures by international community could be
considered as a basis for the Review Conference for further elaboration.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates that maintaining the established delicate
balance between three pillars of the NPT is vital to preserve the credibility and integrity of the
Treaty. Non-nuclear-weapon States could not accept any new obligations pending the full
implementation of outstanding nuclear disarmament undertakings by the nuclear-weapon States.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

4

