IRELAND
Cluster I
Statement by
Ms. Jackie O’Halloran
Director, Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
At the
2018 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 25 April, 2018

Check against Delivery

1

Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

Ireland fully aligns itself with the statements under this cluster made by the
European Union and New Zealand on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition.

Mr. Chairman,
2018 is a year of notable anniversaries. As many States have highlighted, it
marks the 50th year since of the opening for signature of the NPT. It is also the
60th anniversary of the first of the so-called ‘Irish Resolutions’ that eventually
led to the negotiation of the Treaty. In the speech introducing the Resolution
in 1958, Ireland’s then-Minister for External Affairs unambiguously set out the
ambitious aim of the Treaty; to establish ‘a permanent ban’ on the
proliferation of nuclear weapons as ‘a step towards their total abolition’. As we
conduct our work under this cluster and indeed throughout the remainder of
this Review Cycle, we should recall that the seed of the NPT itself had, at its
very core, the objective of complete nuclear disarmament.

While the NPT has developed over its 50-year history to become one of the
most successful multilateral instruments in history and is the backbone of the
non-proliferation regime, its original promise of disarmament remains
unfulfilled. Claims that there is an equivalence of achievement with regard to
multilateral nuclear disarmament compared with the non-proliferation and
peaceful uses pillars of the NPT are simply not credible. On the contrary, the
imbalance across the three pillars is growing and should be a cause of deep
concern for us all.
2

The indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 was not a mandate for the
indefinite retention of nuclear weapons. The unequivocal implementation of
the disarmament provisions of the Treaty must result in a non-discriminatory
environment where all States eventually obtain the status of non-nuclearweapon State. The achievement of this status should be pursued not only in
good faith but with vigour and urgency.

Yet, nuclear weapons are still at centre of some States Parties’ security
doctrines; they are still being developed and modernised; and they still pose an
existential threat to the survival of humanity. Even more worrying is recent
discourse about ‘new missions’ for ‘new nuclear weapons’. Make no mistake,
such a development would result only in new tensions and new instabilities;
jeopardising and undermining the spirit and purpose of NPT itself.

Mr. Chairman,
2018 marks another important anniversary for Ireland in the Disarmament
calendar. It is 20 years since the formation of the New Agenda Coalition; a
group dedicated to the advancement of nuclear disarmament. This year’s NAC
working paper details the commitments from States Parties that have been
made over the course of the NPT’s history in relation to nuclear disarmament,
including the Thirteen Practical Steps agreed in 2000 and the 2010 Action Plan.
These documents set out concrete, ambitious benchmarks, with a realistic
roadmap towards a world free of nuclear weapons. As with the Treaty itself,
there can be no question of reneging on these consensus agreements and the
time to implement them is now.

3

Indeed, there are immediate steps which can be taken, including increased
transparency on the part of the nuclear-weapon States, risk reduction
measures and the de-alterting of deployed systems. We also call on all the
nuclear-weapon States, particularly the United States and Russian Federation
to redouble their efforts with respect to bilateral nuclear weapon reductions.

A treaty banning the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons would
be a further significant step forward and we welcome the Conference on
Disarmament’s adoption of its important decision on working arrangements.
We hope this will lead to a resumption of substantive work and the
revitalisation of the Conference on Disarmament.

The entry into force of the CTBT would also constitute a significant concrete
achievement for the disarmament regime. While welcome, a moratorium on
nuclear testing cannot substitute for the entry into force of a legally binding
instrument banning future testing. Ireland again calls on the remaining Annex 2
states to ratify the CTBT immediately and unconditionally.

Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear weapons are the most powerful and most indiscriminate weapons of
mass destruction ever invented. It is without doubt that their use again would
have catastrophic consequences and cause a humanitarian and environmental
crisis to which there could be no adequate response. This was the driving
factor that led to the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
4

Weapons by Ireland and the vast majority of UN Member States in July last
year. Indeed the adoption of the Treaty by such a large majority is a clear signal
to the nuclear-weapon States that we are no longer willing to accept that it is
they who set the pace and agenda for nuclear disarmament.

As a founding member and in many respects a guardian of the NPT process, it
has always been our consistent position that the TPNW and the NPT are fully
compatible and, indeed, complementary. After all, both the TPNW and the NPT
have the same goal at their core – the abolition of nuclear weapons.
Involvement in one in no way precludes participation in the other. Indeed, the
NPT expressly envisaged, in Article VI, a separate and related treaty on general
and complete nuclear disarmament under strict and effective international
control.

We are proud that the TPNW acknowledges the disproportionate effects on
women and girls of nuclear weapons and it is extremely encouraging to hear
gender issues referenced numerous times in the opening days of this
conference. It must be mainstreamed into the NPT discourse from the dual
viewpoint of the disproportionate impact of ionising radiation on women and
girls and the evident need for women's voices to be heard clearly and given
equal weight in the nuclear weapons debate.

Disarmament is a cross cutting issue with direct relevance to Climate Change
and the Environment; Sustainable Development; Humanitarian objectives and
aid; Gender Equality; Migration; Cultural Heritage and Cyber Security. We
5

simply must step outside of narrow security concerns. In this regard we warmly
welcome UN Secretary General Guterres’s new disarmament initiative which
we hope will restore the role of disarmament as an integral component of
global efforts to maintain international peace and security.

Mr. Chairman,
The argument has been repeatedly made that security conditions are not ripe
for further progress on disarmament. Indeed, the increasingly uncertain
international environment and the erosion of the fundamental tenets that
underpin our multilateral, rules-based system is profoundly disturbing. But it
should be the fire that drives us rather than a cause for resignation. Ireland
firmly believes that disarmament can facilitate an improvement in the
international security environment. Hope, not fear must be our motivation.

It is with this in mind that I would like to mention one last anniversary; 2018
marks 20 years since the Good Friday Agreement was agreed. Despite
entrenched positions and deep-set divisions, it brought a negotiated and
lasting peace to the island of Ireland; something that, at times, didn’t seem
possible. Irish poet and Nobel Laureate, Seamus Heaney perfectly captured the
atmosphere when he wrote that “We lived deep in a land of optative moods,
under high, banked clouds of resignation". The same atmosphere can often
take over disarmament discussions. It is our duty throughout this review cycle
to roll away those clouds.

Thank you.
6

