IRELAND
Statement by

Mr. Breifne O'Reilly
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland

at the

Preparatory Committee for the 20 15 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 1

New York, ~May 2014

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND TO THE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TELEPHONE 212 421·6934 FAX 212 752·4726
newyorkpmun@dfa.ie

Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation ofNuclear Weapons
Cluster 1
Statement by Mr Breifne 0 'Reilly
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade oflreland

Thank, you Mr. Chairman,
Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition
on Wednesday. To this I would add the following points in a national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
It is a very regrettable fact that almost half a century after it entered into force, not one

weapon from within the five nuclear stockpiles recognised by the NPT has been disarmed
under arrangements set out by the Treaty. There ill no arrangements for nuclear
disarmament set out by the NPT. All reductions to date, welcome though they undoubtedly
have been, have been part of a parallel process of disarmament, completely voluntary and
entirely outside of the treaty. This has exposed the Treaty to criticism that it is not operating
to its full potential, although Ireland's support for the NPT is undiminished.
As the New Agenda Coalition pointed out in its statement on nuclear disarmament, we
believe that no treaty wh ich is founded upon a bargain can withstand serious and lasting
damage if there is a failure to honour that bargain and especially if this failure persists over a
lengthy and until now indefinite period.
Because of the time and prevailing political environment in which the NPT was negotiated,
the Treaty was established as a provisionally incomplete instrument which, by countering the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, would allow the existing weapons states a small measure of
time and space to disarm their arsenals as soon as they could. The Treaty took care to
provide a basis for complete nuclear disarmament, however, through its Article VI. This was
to manifest itself in the first instance in good faith negotiations towards "effective measures"
to oversee the multilateral process of nuclear disarmament.
That was forty four years ago, almost twice the originally intended life span ofthe Treaty.
No attempt has been made in the meantime to pursue the "effective measures." Can it any
longer be claimed with credibility that NPT disarmament obligations are being honoured in
full?

It has been suggested that "the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons" are not yet in
place and that we should pursue these before we can pursue nuclear disannament. Ireland
says that the conditions were put in place on the 5th of March 1970 when the N PT entered
into force. We do not see any conditionality or exceptions written into the Treaty's
disarmament obligations. It is not an a Ia carte menu.
It is not logical to assert that certain states should be permitted to retain nuclear weapons on
the basis of what they say are legitimate security concerns while simultaneously claiming that
others cannot cite the same concerns as a reason for seeking the weapons. So, almost fifty
years after entry into force, we must ask ourselves: Is the NPT to become a blueprint for
wholesale weaponisation or one for achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear
weapons?
On the 17th of October 1958, when introducing the first of our resolutions on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation in the General Assembly, Ireland's then foreign minister,
Frank Aiken, made clear what Ireland's ambitions were for what would become the NPT. He
said:
" We have no wish to conceal the fact that we regard the proposed temporary measure of
nuclear restriction as only a step towards a permanent ban on the further dissemination of
nuclear weapons - permanent in the sense that it should remain in being until the total
abolition of nuclear weapons renders it superfluous."
"Temporary .... until the total abolition of nuclear weapons renders it superfluous."
Thi s, I would suggest, was the ambition of all non-nuclear-weapons states when they entered
into the NPT bargain. Failure to honour this bargain now puts the Treaty under increasing
and intolerable strain and has led to considerable frustration in the wider international
community. It is now combining with mounting concern about the risks associated with
nuclear weapons that are being described in new research presented by the Royal Institute of
International Affairs in the United Kingdom and in other publications. The Chatham House
research, which was presented at the United Nations for the first time earlier this week,
suggests the incidence of near misses involving nuclear weapons and of unprofessional
practices on the part of relevant personnel is greater than previously thought. This research
adds to already existing concerns on the part of citizens and policy makers everywhere about
the ever-present risk of accident, systems failure or the actions of non-state actors.
The completion and implementation of a framework for disarmament as demanded by Article
VI would, in addition to facilitating full implementation of the NPT, simultaneously improve
conditions for a world without nuclear weapons by providing the benefits of clarity, equity
and multilateral oversight to the disarmament process. It would protect the process from the
innuence of external political crises and, by separating external political factors from the
multilateral disarmament track, at the same time prevent nuclear weapons possession from a
factor exacerbating political crises.
Mr. Chairman,
In its working paper on Article VI, the options which the New Agenda Coalition has
suggested as offering prospects for achieving this include: a Nuclear Weapons Convention, a

Nuclear Weapons Ban Treaty, a looser framework arrangement of mutually reinforcing
instruments, or a hybrid of any or all of the above. All should be discussed.
The NAC has taken care not to prescribe any one outcome over the others. That is a matter
for States to discuss and decide. In an earlier NAC working paper, submitted by Egypt to the
Open Ended Working Group last year, the NAC identified the essential constituent elements
of any effective measures for disarmament under Article VI, without which these measures
could not achieve their own objective. By identifYing what we need, States can then decide
how to frame it. When it is framed, States can decide what to call it. The key point is that we
must begin the discussions immediately.
It has been suggested that prohibiting nuclear weapons does not guarantee that they will ever
be eliminated. I would suggest, however, that refusing even to countenance the possibility of
prohibition will almost certainly guarantee that these weapons will.!!£lli be eliminated. Is
that our vision for Article VI of the NPT? Is that our definition of implementation? In
Ireland's case, the answer to both questions is a clear "No."
It is not evident to us how NPT review process mechanisms, as structured at present, can
accommodate inclusive and urgent discussions on options for meeting Article VI's demand
for effective measures for disarmament. It~ clear to us that the discussions must take place.
For far too long, we have allowed Article VI of the NPT to stand neglected, and this can no
longer be viewed as "business as usual." We cannot simply keep agreeing plans of action
which have no prospect of being implemented. We watched the thirteen practical steps of
2000 come and go. The extent to which the 2010 Action Plan can be said to have been
implemented will not become clear until next year's Review Conference. We will assess its
implementation then. We must be clear, however, that we will not, under any circumstances,
countenance a simple roll-over ofthe 2010 Action Plan at next year's review conference. To
do so would inflict even further damage on the NPT as a credible driver of disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts.
Mr. Chairman,
The humanitarian consequences discussion has revealed the known risks and conseq uences of
continued collective inaction. These risks and consequences now raise stark policy choices
for all states. They are not easy choices, but they are unavoidable.
On the cenotaph at Hiroshima the epitaph reads: "Please rest in peace, the error shall not be
repeated." That, Mr. Chairman, is a matter which rests in our hands and our hands alone.
Thank you.

