IRELAND
Cluster 1
Statement by

Ms Helena Nolan
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation

at the

2017 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

Vienna, 4 May 2017

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN VIENNA
ROTENTURMSTRASSE 16-18, A1010 VIENNA
Telephone: 017154246 E-mail: vienna@dfa.ie

Thank you Mr Chairman,
I wish to associate my remarks with those of the European Union, the New Agenda
Coalition and the Vienna Group of 10.
As we commence this new Review Cycle, it is natural to take stock. Some of the most
innovative steps in human history have emerged from times of great adversity and
some of the most courageous actions, including actions on disarmament and indeed
on the negotiation of this treaty itself, have been taken at times of intense
international pressure. Indeed, sometimes it is only when we are confronted with the
peril in which we have placed ourselves that we can generate the necessary political
and public will to act. It is good to remind ourselves of this capacity for resilience and
for creativity as we face the challenges of today. The NPT is one of the most innovative
and successful treaties which the international system has created. It emerged from
an era of fear but is founded on elements of trust, trust in our ability to turn back from
the apparently inevitable spread of nuclear weapons, trust to use nuclear technology
solely for peaceful means and trust to negotiate effective measures on nuclear
disarmament.
Over fifty years ago, the fear was very real but the negotiation process was still
difficult. As a result, everything in this treaty is interconnected. Without the three
pillars and in particular without Article VI, we would not have had an agreement on
a treaty at all and without the commitments to a programme of action on
disarmament, to a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction and to an
enhanced Review process, we would not have had agreement on its indefinite
extension in 1995. So, as we approach this Treaty’s fiftieth anniversary, now is not
the time to attempt an a la carte approach. By this Treaty, and by all of these
interconnected commitments, we are bound, to a shared vision, a shared objective
and a shared responsibility. While the NPT is crucial to the non-proliferation
architecture, it would be a mistake to view it solely as a non-proliferation
instrument. It is more complex and even more significant than that. This is a dynamic

treaty with an inherent tension at its heart. This tension finds its source in the
nuclear disarmament pillar, where further work was always envisaged.
It is this further work on effective measures that my Delegation is engaged in at the
United Nations, as we seek to negotiate a new legal instrument for the prohibition of
nuclear weapons leading to their total elimination. We believe that the obligation to
pursue nuclear disarmament applies to all states parties. Our work is therefore
informed by our Article VI commitment but also by our learning from the three
conferences on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons and on newer
presentations since then by our civil society partners and leading authorities like the
ICRC, UNIDIR and Chatham House, as well as the powerful testimonies of living
witnesses with direct experience of nuclear weapons detonations. Gender and
disarmament is also a horizontal priority for my delegation.
Like many States here, we have limited resources at our disposal, but we prioritise
sponsorship funding to promote diverse participation in nuclear disarmament fora,
including improved gender balance. Most recently, Ireland has funded important new
research on the gendered impact of nuclear weapons, both in terms of impacts and
empowerment issues, and we will present this research and associated Working Paper
to this Prep Com. We will also present new research on the connection between
nuclear disarmament and obligations to preserve cultural heritage. All of this expert
research from scientists, medics, lawyers and others reinforces the need for urgent
action. In our view, to not act, would be to renege on our responsibility, as an NPT
state party, as a UN member state and as a responsible government.
We are also committed to all of the other steps identified as contributing to effective
measures on nuclear disarmament, including the CTBT and negotiations on a fissile
material treaty. We were pleased to host the CTBTO data workshops for a week in
Dublin this time last year and we use every opportunity to press for the entry into force
of this important treaty. We condemn all breaches of the global norm on nuclear
explosive testing. We fully support the establishment of verification measures for

nuclear disarmament. We are always interested in constructive proposals and are
prepared to go outside our comfort zone to find good ideas. At the UN First
Committee last October, we co-sponsored each Resolution that, in our assessment,
seemed to offer a positive contribution to nuclear disarmament, even those where we
had some reservations on scope and inclusivity. We do not subscribe to the principle
of the lowest common denominator and we look to States to set ambitious examples
and high standards. We believe that our policies and practices are compatible with,
and reinforcing of, our NPT commitments and the objective of achieving a world
without nuclear weapons.
There is an excellent campaign slogan called “see something, say something”. Our
approach to disarmament is “say something, do something” and we expect no less of
others.
My delegation’s historic association with the NPT is well known. Ireland is consistent,
across all platforms in our unwavering support for the NPT. Our focus is on the
weapon and the impact of the weapon, not on the actor or on the context. We
endorse the former UNSG view that there are no right hands for the wrong weapons.
My Delegation believes that, given the increasing risks surrounding the existence and
potential detonation of a nuclear weapon, either by accident, by miscalculation or
through a deliberate act of terrorism or of war, it is time in our review of this treaty
that we focus, in depth, and with greater specifics on our obligations, analyse how we
measure up and see what needs to be done to ensure better implementation. We
already apply this process to other weapons treaties and we should do no less when it
comes to the most destructive weapon of them all. We have built in such assessment
to other international commitments of global significance, such as the SDGs; it should
not be beyond us here. We regret that on the 64 Actions set out in the 2010 Action
Plan, progress has been limited, in particular on nuclear disarmament actions. We
therefore encourage all delegations to examine the proposals in the NAC working
papers on this issue and we hope that this idea can be elaborated further throughout

the review cycle with a view to the adoption of benchmarks at the 2020 Rev Con,
something which my Delegation referred to in our opening remarks at the 2012
Vienna Prep Com.
Mr Chairman,
There remain an estimated 14,900 nuclear weapons in the world, the detonation of
even a fraction of which would mean the destruction of our planet and catastrophe
for our civilisation. These are such big numbers and such dramatic statements that
sometimes they may seem too much, or even too implausible to comprehend. But the
evidence exists, the evidence of science and of history. The continued reliance on
nuclear weapons in security doctrines and the worrying decrease in the taboo around
possible use is, regrettably, only too real also, as is the amount of resources being
invested in nuclear weapons modernisation and the development of so-called tactical,
more usable, nuclear weapons.
The fallacy of a limited and controlled nuclear exchange is one of the most dangerous
to have re-emerged in recent debates and the review of this treaty provides us with
an important opportunity to counter this false discourse and focus on the reality. The
drafters of the NPT and the politicians who oversaw its origins were in no doubt of this
then and we should not be any less careful today. As President Kennedy said in 1963
- “all we have built, all we have worked for, would be destroyed in the first 24 hours.”
But even by their very existence, nuclear weapons are a drain on humanity and
threaten our other global goals, not just as a sword of Damocles, forever hanging
over us but, as President Kennedy also noted, because of the “massive sums of
money that could be better devoted to combating ignorance, poverty, and disease”.
Instead, the world has need of a genuine focus on those commitments which can
secure our future, commitments we made in the SDGs and the Climate and Migration
Agreements, in UN Resolution 1325, in our obligation to protect human rights and
cultural heritage and in every promise we have made to future generations, including

to our own children, and which, sadly, we undermine each day that we fail to address
the risks these weapons pose.
Security concerns and the security environment have been a recurring theme in our
discussions. But when we speak of security, especially when it comes to weapons
which respect no boundaries and whose reverberating poisons would spread through
the air to damage human, animal and plant life across continents, as well as polluting
our water and soil, with the potential to cause famine and change our weather for a
decade or more, it would be wise to take a step back, to adjust the perspective, from
national, regional, international and to take a global view. What we need now is to
rededicate ourselves to the object and purpose of the NPT and all that it stands for,
which is a world order, founded not on fear of one another, but on faith in one
another. To quote our former Foreign Minister Frank Aiken, speaking at the UN in
1957, “the world today stands in need of inspiration, of imaginative and magnanimous
action which will transcend short-term calculation”.
To conclude Mr Chairman,
This treaty represents our better selves and has the capacity to continue to protect us;
the best way to ensure its enduring viability is to implement it fully. We look forward
to working with all states parties to ensuring this through an effective Review process
– one where we move forward, not backward and one in which the security of
humanity is assured through genuine progress towards the elimination of nuclear
weapons, as first envisaged in the NPT.
Thank you.

