2015 NPT REVIEW CONFERENCE
MAIN COMMITTEE I

STATEMENT BY
H.E. AMBASSADOR VINICIO MATI

PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT

(NEW YORK, MAY 4, 2015)

Check against delivery

Mr. Chair,

Let me first of all congratulate you on your appointment as Chair of
this Main Committee I. I would also like to assure you of my Delegation's
full support and cooperation.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union.
Having said that, I would like to add some additional remarks in a
national capacity.
Mr. Chair,

We are committed to achieving a successful outcome of this
Conference based on consensus.
In our view the 2010 Action Plan, which includes tangible steps on
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, remains an essential basis upon which we can build our future
deliberations. However, we recognize that further efforts are needed for
its comprehensive, balanced and full implementation.
Any further progress in the implementation of the Treaty should be
based on the consideration that its three pillars are mutually reinforcing.
Since the last Review Conference, the Italian contribution to the goal
of a safer world for all without nuclear weapons, in accordance with
Article VI of the NPT, has taken different forms.
First, on the so called humanitarian campaign, we share the utmost
concern about the catastrophic consequences associated with nuclear
weapons use. Therefore, we believe that an effective, verifiable and
irreversible nuclear disarmament has to be pursued through a step by step
or a building-block approach.

2

Italy will continue contributing to the creation of the conditions for a
safer world for all without nuclear weapons, in accordance with Article VI
of the NPT, focusing on common ground.
In this vein, Italy has joined the statement made by the Australian
delegation on behalf of a large group of like-minded countries.
Furthermore, we are contributing constructively to the current debate by
organizing a workshop to examine this topic under the lens of international
law.
This workshop, entitled "Nuclear Weapons and Human Security",
will be held at the International Institute of Humanitarian Law, in Italy, in
the city of Sanremo, on the 18th of June.
The promotion of international stability, based on the principle of
undiminished security for all, and the full implementation of the nonproliferation obligations are critical components of international
environment appropriate for a world without nuclear weapons in
accordance with the Treaty. Disarmament cannot be detached from nonproliferation.
In this vein, as a member of the Group of Governmental Experts on a
Treaty banning the production of fissile material we welcome the
successful outcome of its works. We would like to thank the Chair of the
GGE, Ambassador Elissa Goldberg, for her invaluable contribution to this
achievement. After the in-depth discussion we had last year in the
Conference on Disarmament, we share the view that this subject is ripe for
an early commencement of negotiations in the CD. We welcome the
French proposal concerning a draft FMCT as a constructive and
meaningful contribution to our work.

3

This Treaty would be crucial to foster both disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation. In the meantime, we continue supporting the
moratorium on the production of fissile material.
Moreover, we welcome the launch of the International Partnership
for Nuclear Disarmament Verification, as an innovative initiative
involving both Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Weapon States, and we intend to
be fully engaged in it by making available all our relevant expertise.
Mr. Chair,

We welcome the reduction made by most of the nuclear weapons
States. In this context, we value the indications of progress in
implementing the New START Treaty by the Russian Federation and the
United States. We strongly encourage them to seek further reductions in
their nuclear arsenals including strategic, non-strategic deployed and nondeployed weapons.
We appreciate the holding of nuclear weapons States conferences on
the follow-up to the 2010 NPT Review Conference and their concrete
deliverables, such as the PS Glossary of key nuclear terms, as well as other
nuclear activities and discussions aimed at building mutual trust and
transparency.
Italy supports the prompt entry into force of the Comprehensive TestBan Treaty that would strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime and significantly contribute to the goal of a world without nuclear
weapons. Pending this event, we support a comprehensive moratorium on
nuclear weapons tests.
Finally, with reference to the remarks made by some delegations
concerning NATO nuclear basing arrangements, I would like to highlight
- as already underlined by other NATO Member States - that these
arrangements were already in place when the NPT entered into force in
4

1970. They were made clear to negotiating delegations and were made
public. The abovementioned arrangements are fully compatible with the
NPT obligations of NATO Allies.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.

5

.,

