STATEMENT
BY H.E. NLR.ILlARIAMAN0
AMBASSADOR,
PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF JAPAN
TO THE CONFERENCE
ON DISARMAMENT

FIRSTSESSION
OF THE PREPARATORY
COMMITTEE
FOR THE 20 15 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES
TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (WT)
- CLUSTERI VIENNA,3 MAY 20 12

Mr. Chairman,
Looking over the international developments in the field of nuclear disarmament
since the NPT Review Conference in 2010, there have been a number of achievements.
Notably, during this time the two states with the largest nuclear arsenals, the United
States and the Russian Federation, ratified the New START Treaty and France and the
United Kingdom announced unilateral nuclear reductions. Japan welcomes the
voluntary measures by these nuclear-weapon states and encourages them to continue to
make progress in nuclear disarmament.

In order to realize a world without nuclear weapons, however, it is indispensable for
the nuclear-weapon states to make disarmament efforts in good faith on a multilateral
basis as required by Article VI of the NPT. In the agreed Action Plan of the 2010
Review Conference, the nuclear-weapon states are called upon to honor their
unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals
and to make further efforts to reduce all types of nuclear weapons. Action 5 is
particularly significant as it calls for the nuclear-weapon states to accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament and to report their undertakings by
the 2014 Preparatory Committee. All the nuclear-weapon states are urged to fulfill this
commitment.
Pending the realization of multilateral and global nuclear disarmament, Japan
appeals to all states possessing nuclear weapons to make an early commitment to
reducing, or at least not increasing their nuclear holdings.

Mr. Chairman,
When implementing nuclear disarmament measures, applying the principles of
irreversibility, verifiability, and transparency is critical. Amongst these principles,
ensuring transparency is vital as a confidence-building measure for creating the basis of
a stable global security environment. In this respect, Japan regards Action 21 as a
significant and landmark step which encourages all the nuclear-weapon states to agree
as soon as possible on a standard reporting form as a confidence-building measure.
In this connection, the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI)
developed a proposal for such a reporting form and shared it with the nuclear-weapon
states. We have also submitted that reporting form to this PrepCom which is attached
to our working paper entitled "Transparency of nuclear weapons." Japan hopes that
the NPDI's input contributes to agreement by the nuclear-weapon states on a standard
reporting form and to appropriate reporting intervals.
Additional to transparency, the principle of irreversibility is also very important.
Based on Action 16, it is requested that all the nuclear-weapon states declare to the
IAEA all fissile material designated by each of them as no longer required for military
purposes and place such material as soon as practicable under IAEA or other relevant
international verification and arrangements. As such, Japan welcomes the recent
US.-Russian Plutonium Management Disposition Agreement.

Mr. Chairman,
On our path to a world without nuclear weapons, Japan recognizes a fissile material
cut-off treaty (FMCT) as the next logical step. Action 15 urges the Conference on
Disarmament to immediately begin negotiation of such a treaty. However, despite all
the efforts of the CD member states, as yet there is regrettably no emerging prospect of
this occurring. While continuing efforts to commence negotiations in the CD, Japan
believes it is necessary to consider options that will lead to the start of FMCT
negotiations.
In the meantime, until the entry into force of an FMCT, Japan calls upon all the
states possessing nuclear weapons to declare and maintain a moratorium on the
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.

Mr. Chairman,
The entry into force of the CTBT is important as a practical and concrete step
towards achieving a nuclear weapon free world. Japan would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the ratification of the CTBT by Indonesia in February 2012.
We have seized every occasion to urge all non-states parties, particularly the h e x I1
states, to promptly sign and ratify the CTBT, and we intend to continue these activities.
Furthermore, we urge all the states possessing nuclear weapons to declare a moratorium
on nuclear testing and call upon all states to refrain from any further tests pending the
entry into force of the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,
To overcome the challenges to disarmament and non-proliferation, the support and
understanding of civil society and the younger generations is essential. Japan attaches
high value to disarmament and non-proliferation education and we have been proactive
in this field. The inclusion of Action 22 into the 2010 NPT Final Document was an
important milestone since it encourages all states to implement the recommendations
contained in the report of the UN Secretary-General regarding the United Nations study
on disarmament and non-proliferation education. In this regard, we urge States Parties
to report to the UN Secretary General their implementation of the recommendations as
called for by the UN General Assembly resolution on disarmament and
non-proliferation education. On this subject, Japan has submitted a working paper to
this PrepCom with its NPDI partners as well as one with Austria separately.
Additionally, in order to advance further collaboration with international organizations
and civil society, Japan has decided to jointly hold with the United Nations University
"the Global Forum on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Education" in the City of
Nagasaki from 10 to 11 August this year. Through this forum, we aim to promote
common understanding of the importance of disarmament and non-proliferation
education and cooperation among various actors, which it is hoped will lead to further
developments in this field.

Mr. Chairman,
Japan is fully committed to achieving a peaceful and secure world free of nuclear
weapons. Having experienced the tragedy caused by the atomic bombings of

Hiroshima and Nagasaki, it is our strong conviction that nuclear weapons must never be
used again. It is with this in mind that Japan intends to continue to steadily promote
practical steps and effective measures towards the total elimination. of nuclear weapons.
Thank you.

