Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates,
It is a great pleasure to see you, Ambassador Sudjadnan, presiding over Main Committee T. Our task ahead may not be easy as we face various challenges to the NPT regime. Nevertheless, 1 have every confidence in your ability and I assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation as you guide us through this Committee s deliberations.
(Basic Viewpoint on Nuclear Disarmament) Mr. Chairman,
This year marks 35 years since the entry into force of the NPT, a key instrument in realizing global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. In order to reinforce the authority and credibility of this regime, both nuclear weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States must implement their obligations and commitments under the Treaty, and promote both nuclear non- proliferation and disarmament, which are mutually reinforcing. It is imperative that nuclear-weapon States demonstrate their intention to fulfill their pledge for nuclear disarmament and that all States Parties work towards maintaining and strengthening; the non-proliferation regime.
The quantity of nuclear weapons in the world reached its peak in the mid"80s. Today, although that number has been reduced to less than halt it is said that more than 20,000 (twenty-thousand) nuclear weapons still remain in the world. The realization of the total elimination of nuclear weapons requires unfailing determination and renewed commitment by all states. 35 years after the N.PTs entry into force, we must once again recall- our obligations under Article VI to pursue negotiations in good faith on disarmament measures! our commitment to the 1995 decision on "Principles and Objectives," an integral part of a package with the NPT indefinite extension; and the: "unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of nuclear weapons/'' one of the 13 practical steps agreed upon in the 2000 Final Document.
(Nuclear Disarmament Measures by Nuclear Weapon States) Mr. Chairman,
The efforts of the nuclear weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals should be duly appreciated. Japan highly values the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions (the Moscow Treaty) and encourages both Russia and the United States to work towards it-ft full implementation and to consider building on the Treaty to realize further reductions by recognizing it as a basis for the future, not an end in itself.
Japan calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to take further steps towards nuclear disarmament with greater transparency and in an irreversible manner, including deeper reductions in all types of nuclear weapons and restraint of further reinforcement of these weapons. Japan greatly appreciates that some of the nuclear-weapon States have reported the measures they have taken in this regard and encourages others to follow suit.
(CTBT)
Mr. Chairman,
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is an historic milestone in the promotion of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. In particular, banning nuclear testing will load to a restriction in the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and will render the use of fissile materials as weapons more difficult. Japan attaches great significance to the early entry into force of the CTBT We must recall that the CTBT is an integral part of the 1995 package to allow the indefinite extension of the NPT and that the 2000 Final Document pointed out "the importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications."
Japan has been making various contributions to this end and the number of countries which have ratified the CTBT has been steadily increasing, with an additional eight ratifications over
the past year. Japan, together with Australia. Finland and the Netherlands, hosted the CTBT Friends Ministerial Meeting last September and a Joint Ministerial Statement was issued, calling upon all states that have not yet done? so to sign and ratify the Treaty. Japan calls upon the remaining eleven countries whose ratification is necessary for the Treaty's entry into force to sign and ratify without delay. Moratoriums 011 nuclear weapon test explosions should be continued pending the entry into force of the Treaty. Efforts to develop the CTBT verification regime, including the International Monitoring System (IMS), should also be continued.
(FMCT) Mr. Chairman,
The conclusion of an FMCT (fissile material cut-off treaty) will be an essential building block towards the total elimination of nuclear arsenals and will contribute to the prevention of nuclear proliferation by globally banning the production of fissile; materials for nuclear weapons and enhancing transparency and accountability in the management of such materials through its verification system. It will also serve as an effective tool in dealing with the terrorist threat.
It is extremely regrettable that, despite previous agreements, the impasse of the Conference on Disarmament (CD) continues and negotiations on an FMCT have not yet started. We must remind ourselves of the commitments we made in the 1995 decision OIL "Principles and Objectives/' and again in the 2000 Final Document, to the immediate commencement of negotiations on an FMCT This Review Conference must send a clear message to the CD, reaffirming the importance of the immediate commencement of negotiations, in order to facilitate progress in the upcoming CD Session.
Japan calls upon all nuclear-weapon States and the non-NPT states to declare moratoriums on the production of fissile material for any nuclear weapons pending the entry into force of an FMCT.
(Universality) Mr. Chairman.
The NPT has gained near universality, however it still remains of serious concern that India, Israel and Pakistan have not yet acceded to the Treaty. These states remaining outside the NPT regime, which are developing or suspected of developing nuclear weapons, risk sending out erroneous messages to NPT States Parties suggesting there are benefits to remaining outside the Treaty. NPT States Parties should strongly urge these non NPT States to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear weapon States without delay. These non NPT States should not forget that, as members of the international community, they carry the political responsibility of preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. Japan calls upon these states to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and purpose of the Treaty, as well as to implement practical measures towards disarmament and non proliferation.
(Japan Australia Joint Paper) Mr. Chairman,
Japan, jointly with Australia, has submitted to the Conference a document containing the gist of the concrete messages on nuclear disarmament that we believe should be conveyed by the Conference in order to strengthen the NPT regime. This joint paper outlines, in detail, nuclear disarmament measures other than those I have just elaborated.
(Disarmament and Non-Proliferate on Education) Mr. Chairman.
Japan places utmost importance on disarmament and non* proliferation education in order to gain support and understanding for our cause from civil society and the youth who will lead the next generation. Polio wing on from last year's
4
Preparatory Committee. Japan has again this year submitted a national paper detailing the efforts we have boon undertaking in this field. Furthermore. Japan, jointly with Egypt. Hungary, Mexico, N/> Peru, Poland and Sweden, has submitted to this Review Conference a working paper which contains concrete recommendations for promoting disarmament and non- proliferation education.
It is important that we are all fully aware of the inhumane nature of nuclear weapons and widely disseminate information to this effect. I would like to encourage all States Parties to undertake concrete activities to implement the recommendations contained in the UN Secretary General's report on disarmament and non-proliferation education and to share information on efforts they have been undertaking to this end.
(Outcome of  the Review Conference) Mr. Chairman,
Japan believes that it is important for this Conference to build or the success of the 2000 Review Conference and to put forward concrete and achievable disarmament measures for the next five years, as well as the foreseeable future, fully taking into account all agreements and commitments made at previous Conferences. Japan sincerely hopes that this Conference will produce a future oriented, balanced final document containing, not only the results of the review of the Twenty. but also practical disarmament measures for achieving :he Treaty's goal.
(Conclusion) Mr. Chairman,
This year marks the 60th anniversary of the tragedies in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. With the determination that such nuclear devastation never be repeated, there is a strong voice from the citizens of Japan and the international community that nuclear weapons be abolished, arid all States Parties should renew their commitment toward the total elimination of these weapons. Let us unite as one to turn this commitment into a concrete reality as we work towards universal nuclear disarmament.
Thank you very much.
