STATEMENT

BY

AMBASSADOR MICHAEL A.O. OYUGI, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

ATTHE

FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY REVIEW CONFERENCE

ON

CLUSTER 1:

NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT AND RELATED ISSUES

Mr. Chairmang
On, behalf of the Kenyan delegation, I wish to congratulate you for assuming
chairmanship of this important meeting. I am confident in your ability to successfully
steer the Session. I assure you of my delegation’s full support.
Kenya associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative of
Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I reaffirm Kenya’s long standing commitment to the objectives of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) which remains the
cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Since its entry into force

in 1970, the Treaty has provided an important framework for multilateral cooperation
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear weapons do not enjoy international support. Majority of states have chosen
not to pursue nuclear weapons, The Vienna, Oslo and Nayarit conferences on the
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons have significantly contributed to a
paradigm shift away from security concerns to humanitarian concerns as a basis for
nuclear disarmament, thus creating a new dimension to the debate on nuclear
disarmament. There is growing opposition against nuclear weapons due to the real
and imminent threat to all of humanity and the planet posed by their use, either by
accident, miscalculation, mistake or by intention, which would be a grave violation of
fundamental human rights and humanitarian law. The humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons can help to de-legitimize nuclear weapons not only in the minds of
people but also in the mainstream media.
Although there has been a significant reduction of nuclear warheads since the
1 960s, there still remain too many nuclear warheads in existence today capable of
the total destruction of mankind and the planet. There is absolutely no justification or
rationale for the existence of nuclear weapons and we urge Nuclear Weapon States
to devise new Defence and Security doctrines that do not include nuclear weapons.
Total and complete nuclear disarmament must therefore remain our ultimate goal.
Mr. Chairman,
Kenya considers the threat of nuclear weapons or nuclear material falling into the
hands of terrorists and organized criminal groups as real and immediate requiring
increased vigilance and collective action. Considering the new and emerging threats,
especially those posed by terrorists, and the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of the explosion of even a single nuclear warhead, it is of vital
importance that we intensify the pace of negotiations on the disarmament agenda. In
this regard, we urge the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva to embark on
substantive work as a matter of utmost urgency.

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation proposes the following measures to take forward the disarmament
agenda:
• It is imperative that we work towards universal adherence of the NPT by all
States. Kenya invites those States not parties to the NPT, especially those
with nuclear capabilities or possessing nuclear weapons, to join the NPT;
•. Kenya recognizes the integral role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in non-proliferation through its safeguards system as mandated by the
NPT. The IAEA should continue to be supported to enable it continue
monitoring and verifying in an objective, professional and independent
manner the non-diversion of all nuclear material in a State from peaceful to
military purposes:
•: It is of vital importance that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) enters into force without any further delay. Kenya urges the remaining
Annex II States to sign and ratify the CTBT as a matter of priority so as to
facilitate its early entry into force:
•• As a State party to the Treaty of Pelindaba, that establishes a Nuclear
Weapons Free Zone in Africa, Kenya recognizes the significant role that
Nuclear Weapons Free Zones (NWFZ) can play in nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. The Treaty of Pelindaba is a strong indicator of Africa’s
commitment to, nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We encourage
and support the establishment of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones in other
regions of the world including in the Middle East and call upon all those
concerned to engage, in good faith, in discussions towards that endeavour:
•• It is also important that the terms of the proposed Fissile Materials Cut-off
Treaty (FMCT) are clarified and the Treaty expeditiously negotiated. The
Treaty will contribute to nuclear disarmament and go a long way in creating a
framework that bans the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices;
•. We urge States to work towards transparency and confidence building
measures regarding their nuclear capacities and plans. We call upon Nuclear
Weapon States to fully implement their disarmament obligations as envisaged
in the NPT and as agreed upon in the 1995, 2000 and 2010 NPT Review
Conferences;

Mr. Chairman,
As I conclude, Kenya reiterates that that there is no contradiction between the
objectives of the NPT and the pursuit of an internationally legally binding instrument
banning the possession, development, production, and acquisition of nuclear

weapons. On the contrary, we are convinced that the two are complimentary and
mutually reinforcing.
We urge all States to join in the ongoing multilateral negotiations aimed at
establishing, a legally binding instrument banning nudear weapons, the only
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) that have not been expressly prohibited by an
international legally binding instrument.
Th goaI of a world free at ñàáluIr wéipàñs livery fehsibli If We all work
together and take bold political decisions. We owe it to our children and the
future generations to leave them a safer world free of the threat of nuclear
annihilation.
I thank you, Mr. ChaIrman.

4

