Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR DATO' AMRAN MOHAMED ZIN
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN GENEVA
CLUSTER 1: NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
THE SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE NPT
GENEVA , 26 APRIL 2018

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia associates itself with the statement of the NAM (Non-Aligned Movement)
States Parties to the NPT as delivered by Indonesia. Malaysia also endorses the NAM
Working Papers, submitted under this Nuclear Disarmament Cluster.
2.
Malaysia is resolutely committed to the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Nuclear disarmament remains our highest priority in the multilateral disarmament and
international security agenda .
3.
Malaysia is party to the NPT and CTBT. Together with our neighbours in
Southeast Asia, we established the SEANWFZ Treaty and its Protocol. We participated
in the negotiations and adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
(TPNW), and became amongst the first to have signed it. We commit ourselves to the
multilateral and regional nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation frameworks not only
because we never have even slightest of intention to acquire nuclear weapons. We also
want to contribute actively to the concerted international efforts seeking to rid our planet
of the most destructive and the most inhumane of all weapons of mass destruction.
4.
This long-standing position of Malaysia against nuclear weapons , we are
convinced, Mr. Chairman, reflects the position of the overwhelming majority of States
and other nuclear disarmament stakeholders in international organisations, NGOs and
civil society organisations represented here and the world over.
5.
Regrettably, progress in nuclear disarmament is still lacking. Nuclear weapons
arsenals continue to exlst in large numbers. They are constantly modernised and
adapted according to strategic defence doctrines of the States which possess them.
Risks of nuclear weapons use and threats of use are increasing. Such that they are
greater now tha n during the cold war. Very serious concerns are repeatedly expressed
about catastrophic consequences of nuclear conflagration on humanity, regardless if
nuclear detonation is due to deliberate actions or military incidents.
1

6.
lt is therefore imperative that we the NPT States Parties use the opportunity of
the current treaty review cycle to push for concrete, effective, verifiable and irreversible
nuclear disarmament measures, beyond just preventing horizontal proliferation. We
should redouble our efforts towards a total elimination of nuclear weapons. This is the
treaty obligation, which all States Parties have committed to when joining the NPT, and
subsequently reaffirmed when extending the Treaty indefinitely.
7.
The indefinite extension of the NPT does not imply the indefinite possession of
nuclear arsenals by the nuclear weapons States. The obligation under the Treaty's
Article VI remains to be fulfilled. This is the obligation that has been legally reinforced by
the International Court of Justice in 1996 when the Court decided unanimously that
there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a concluslon negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international
control.
8.
It is within this context also Malaysia considers the 2017 Prohibition Treaty as
very instrumental to the global efforts to achieve the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear
weapons, complementing if not reinforcing our efforts under the NPT framework.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
If we are to sustain the credibility of the NPT, we should set ambitious targets
relevant to the Treaty's nuclear disarmament pillar for the 2020 Review Conference.
Full and systematic implementation of the Thirteen Practical Steps of 2000, the 2010
NPT Action Plan, removal of nuclear weapons from high alerts status, among others,
must be accelerated. The emerging risks and threats of use of nuclear weapons, as well
as their modernisation should also be adequately addressed to result in concrete
preventative measures.
10.
The primary responsibility for the implementation of nuclear disarmament
measures ultimately rests with the nuclear weapons States. But all the other NPT States
Parties, collectively or individually, have a stake in ensuring that there will be tangible
progress in nuclear disarmament towards the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Malaysia hopes there would be greater political will to move us closer to this goal.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

2

