MAIAYSIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE llNITED NATIONS
(Please check against delivery)
STATEMENT BY
MR. RAJA REZA RAJA ZAIB SHAH
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
MAIN COMMITTEE 1
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS,
NEW YORK, 4 MAY 2015

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation congratulates you on your appointment as Chairman of Main Committee
1 of the 2015 NPT Review Conference. You can be assured of my delegation's full
support in fulfilling your tasks and responsibilities.
2.
My delegation takes this opportunity to associate itself with the statements
delivered by Iran on behalf of the NAM States Parties to the NPT, and by Switzerland
on behalf of the De-Alerting Group. In addition, my delegation wishes to make the
following points.
Mr. Chairman,
3.
The goal of a world free of nuclear weapons has long been envisioned. As far
back as 1946, the UN General Assembly, in its first resolution, spoke about the
elimination of nuclear weapons. Yet now, nearly seventy years on, thousands of nuclear
weapons remain. That is far too long, and far too many.
4.
During the Cold War, stability came about through mutually assured destruction.
Since its end, the world has been unipolar. Yet, current geo-political trends suggest that
not all states are agreeable to this. We are seeing that the world now is becoming less
predictable. The possession of nuclear weapons, with doctrines suggesting that nuclear
weapons can be maintained or used as a counterweight to conventional inferiority lead the world into an unstable and dangerous future.
5.
Too little progress has been made to decrease the number of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, vertical proliferation continues which negates any reduction in
numbers. Much more needs to be done to ensure that these weapons are eliminated
forever. Nuclear weapons are inhumane with a destructive power which no State or
international organization has the capacity to address or provide assistance.
313 East 43'' Street
New York, NY 10017

Tel: (212) 986 6310
Fax: (212) 490 8576

Email: mwnewyorkun@kln.gov.my
Website: www.un.int/malaysia

6.
The continued existence of nuclear weapons stockpiles to this day greatly
endangers the non"proliferation goal of the NPT. We have witnessed how States have
foregone their commitments to the Treaty in order to pursue a nuclear weapons
ambition, fuelled by the false hope of security and power that these weapons possess.
There are also credible fears that non-State actors may wish to obtain nuclear weapons
or materials for the purpose of terrorism and other criminal acts. Hence, efforts leading
to the total elimination of nuclear weapons should remain the priority of the international
community in our endeavour to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe should a nuclear
explosion occur.
·
7.
The international community needs to reemphasis the importance of nuclear
disarmament, vigour on the issue is needed, new ideas and fresh thoughts required. It
is timely for the urgent commencement of negotiations on a legally binding instrument
for the prohibition and ban of nuclear weapons.
8.
Malaysia has always maintained a principled position on the general and
complete disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. We are strongly committed that
this goal should be achieved through the multilateral process. We also firmly believe
that the complete and total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only solution against
the possible use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
At this juncture, an overall assessment of the implementation of the Action Plan
is important in determining how we approach the Review Conference. Out of the 22
items in the 2010 Action Plan which addressed nuclear disarmament and security
assurances, some were partly fulfilled. Most were not. We value the multilateral nature
of the NPT in which all States commit themselves to the decisions made here. The
credibility of the NPT lies with the implementation of its past agreements and decisions.
The lack of action on these decisions will seriously jeopardise the future of the NPT and
how States value its work.
10.
This Review Conference gives us an opportunity to move forward on nuclear
disarmament. The targets for this Revcon need to be ambitious and realistic, time
bound and pragmatic. Moreover, the goals under this pillar of disarmament should not
be overwhelmed by the goals to be agreed upon under the other pillars of nonproliferation and peaceful uses.
11.
The wide gap between nuclear weapons states and non-nuclear weapons states
needs to be bridged. Nuclear disarmament can no longer be said to be a work in
progress. Nuclear disarmament has to go hand-in-hand with the non-proliferation
initiatives which are actively pursued.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

2

