MISION PERMANENTE DE MEXICO

STATEMENT OF THE MEXICAN DELEGATION, DURING THE MAIN COMMITTEE I
OF THE IX REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE
NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
New York, May 1st 2015
Ambassador Enrique Román Morey:
It is an honor for Mexico to see a representative of Peru, a friend and an ally of Mexico,
chairing this committee. You can count on the support of my delegation.
Mr. President:
The work of this Committee will not be easy, because the analysis of the implementation of the sections of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) that
we will undertake includes the only article of this instrument which has not seen progress in the 45 years of the existence of the Treaty.
The position of my country is well known: the objectives of nuclear disarmament of the
"great bargain" on which the NPT rests on have not been implemented, despite being
an obligation for the parties.
We recognize that today nuclear arsenals are substantially lower compared to those in
the Cold War.
We are also aware of the current geopolitical and strategic situation. However, Mexico
considers unacceptable and unjustifiable to argue that more than 16 000 nuclear weapons, many of them in high operational alert, are the basis for the security of some countries in detriment of the collective security.
Compliance with Article VI of the NPT is not conditional or optional. In the general debate we heard with alarm and curiosity that many voices claimed that Article VI can be
fulfilled only until certain conditions are met. Other voices affirm that unilateral, bilateral
or regional decisions are in compliance with Article VI of the NPT. The truth is that, as it
was stated by the International Court of Justice, Article VI implies an obligation of result
for the Parties of the NPT to conduct multilateral negotiations on effective measures for
nuclear disarmament, which has not yet occurred.

Nuclear weapons remain at the heart of the deterrence strategies of those countries that
possess them and at the center of their military doctrines. The possessors seem to be
again ready to use nuclear weapons, threaten to use them and glorify them as the
guarantee of their collective security. Several countries that are non-nuclear weapons
states depend on these weapons under military alliances, and some of them have nuclear weapons of other countries in their territories. In addition, non-nuclear states defend these weapons and assign them value or prestige.
These actions encourage proliferation. While nuclear weapons exist there will always be
those who want to acquire them and the risk that someone wants to use them will persist. As long as these weapons exist, the risk of a detonation, accidental or intentional,
will continue.
Some argue that the indefinite extension, 20 years ago, of a treaty originally conceived
as a temporary agreement (the NPT), conferred an alleged right to indefinitely possess
nuclear weapons to countries that have them. The rhetoric of some countries seems to
justify the possession of nuclear weapons as a sign of prestige or preeminence of certain actors in the international community.
This situation is undermining the credibility of the regime established by the NPT and
questions the commitment of the parties, not only to the implementation of Article VI, but
also of Articles I and II of the Treaty and the Action 5 of the Action Plan adopted by the
Review Conference of 2010. All parties to the Treaty are obliged to follow policies consistent with the NPT; and we are committed to the goal of achieving a world free of nuclear weapons, not with the justification of the existence and preservation of the most
devastating and indiscriminate weapons created by humans.
Mr. President:
Mexico wants this Review Conference to be a success, as the one held in 2010. My
delegation will be very ambitious but also very constructive, among other reasons because our proposals are firmly anchored in the NPT and look for its strengthening.
Therefore we hope, as an acceptable minimum, that its conclusions include a reaffirmation of the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to the total elimination of their arsenals, as well as concrete actions to initiate new multilateral negotiations
on effective measures for nuclear disarmament without further delay.
In this regard, we consider crucial that the Conference has a substantive and clear discussion on how to move these multilateral negotiations forward.
In the same sense, and as the New Agenda Coalition noted in the working document
WP8, we must devote ourselves not only on "how to" advance the multilateral negotiations to achieve and sustain a world free of nuclear weapons, but also on "which” would
be the effective measures required by Article VI of the NPT which would be the subject
of such negotiations. Therefore, the subsidiary body of this committee must address this
discussion.

Mr. President:
In addition to asking ourselves how to take forward nuclear disarmament negotiations,
and which measures are going to be negotiated, we should ask ourselves why, or which
is the reason for the need to do this work with urgency.
The horrors of the attacks to Hiroshima and Nagasaki with nuclear weapons reported by
the survivors and first hand witnesses laid the foundation of the spirit of the NPT. This is
how the objectives of the Treaty were framed within the consideration of “the devastation that would be visited upon all mankind by a nuclear war and the consequent need
to make every effort to avert the danger of such a war and to take measures to safeguard the security of peoples”.
The concern for the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons recognized by the
2010 Review Conference, and the consideration of the extension of the damage caused
by nuclear weapons and their effects from a contemporary society point of view, has
been a crucial element in the discussions of the 2010-2015 review cycle.
The Review Conference has to incorporate the findings and evidence on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons of the three international conferences on this matter celebrated in Norway, Mexico and Austria. 160 countries have endorsed this principle: that
the consideration of the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons is the basis of our deliberations. This is also the compromise of the 80 countries that endorsed the “Austrian
Pledge”.
The conclusions of the three conferences that have been put under consideration of the
Review Conference, as well as the working paper WP30 with recommendations to the
Conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons should be used as the
foundation for our reflection in this committee.
Mr. President,
One of the major contributions of the Humanitarian Initiative is the confirmation that the
existence of nuclear weapons and their elimination are fundamental. It is about central
issues for humanity and not only for a few, including nuclear weapons states and the
members of the Conference on Disarmament, paralyzed for almost two decades not only regarding its substantive agenda but also regarding its membership, which is limited
and closed. We should then ask, considering the inclusiveness spirit we all share, what
the other 120 Parties to the NPT that are not members of the Conference on Disarmament think on the possibility of being excluded from the negotiations on nuclear disarmament, instead of participating in the universal forum par excellence: the United Nations General Assembly.
Mexico, as well as many other countries, hopes that one of the contributions of this Review Conference will be the initiation of a clearly defined and irrevocable process for the

negotiation of effective measures towards nuclear disarmament in conformity with Article VI of the NPT. In other words, the full implementation of the Treaty.
For Mexico it is clear that this review cycle is our last opportunity to guarantee inclusiveness.
Mr. President,
Mexico wishes to reiterate that the commitments and obligations contained in the Treaty
and in past review conferences are still valid and relevant. We express our dissatisfaction because many of these commitments have not been implemented or have been
even disregarded.
However, we firmly believe that this Review Conference most constitute a turning point
towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
We believe that the best tribute that we can render to the survivors of the attacks of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and to the victims of nuclear tests is to accept without hesitance
that nuclear weapons have no place in the construction of a safer and peaceful world
and that nuclear weapons need to be prohibited and eliminated so they cannot be used
again, by any actor and under any circumstances.
Thank you

