check against delivery

Non-Proliferation Treaty – Review Conference 2015
Statement by H.E. Henk Cor van der Kwast, Ambassador of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands to the CD and Disarmament Ambassador at large
Cluster 1

6 May 2015

Mr Chairman,
Let me first congratulate you on your election as chair of this important committee. The success of
this conference will largely depend on the outcomes of this committee. We know we are in excellent
hands as you have proved with your successful chairmanship of last year’s prepcom. Let me assure
you that this delegation stands ready to assist you in any way we can.
Mr Chairman,
The Netherlands remains firmly engaged on the road towards a world without nuclear weapons.
We continue to believe that the best way to reach that goal is via a step-by-step approach and by
taking practical and concrete measures while paring ambition with realism. Realism does not imply
leaning back, in our view it means working harder. Step-by-step does not mean that we cannot make
more steps at the same time. On the contrary, we can and should work at different levels to take us
forward.
Where we are
Let me start by underlining that progress has been made.
The continuing implementation of newSTART reduced the Russian and American strategic arsenals to
their lowest level in more than 50 years. Even in the current geopolitical climate, the implementation
of newSTART continues. The UK and France have unilaterally reduced their numbers.
On transparency all P5 have reported last year and have announced to report again this year on the
implementation of the action plan. There are differences in the qualities of these reports and more
detail is required, but it is a constructive step in the right direction and one we can build on. I will
come back to this later.
The recent visits to Los Alamos in the US and Luxeuil air force base in France are small, but important
contributions to enhance transparency. We encourage other P5 members to organize similar visits.
We welcome the publication of the P5 glossary and the efforts put into it by the delegation of China
and the other P5 members. Since there are still a number of issues that were not yet included, we
look forward to volume II.
On verification steps have been taken. The Norway - UK collaboration to investigate technical and
procedural challenges regarding possible a future nuclear disarmament verification regime is useful.
Also the new US led International Partnership for verification is a constructive and necessary initiative
that can help us further do deal with important verification issues.
The Group of Governmental Experts on an FMCT has produced a substantial consensus report,
which provides the necessary groundwork for the start of negotiations on a verifiable FMCT. Let me
use this opportunity to again compliment the members of and the chair of the GGE, Ambassador Elissa
Golberg for the excellent work she and her team have done. We hope the report can help to bring
about the immediate start of negotiations.
The Netherlands welcomes these achievements and we should discuss how we can further build on
those during this conference.
However we agree strongly that more needs to be done.

The frustration about the slow pace of progress is growing. We share this frustration. We see the
broad attention for the humanitarian impact of the use of nuclear weapons and the conferences
in Oslo, Nayarit and Vienna as an expression of this frustration. Like many others we hope that the
momentum of this approach can give a fresh impetus to disarmament and will enable us to take
necessary steps towards global zero at this conference.
At the same time, we cannot ignore security and stability considerations. However, while
geopolitical developments should be taken into account, they should not be a reason to slow down
nuclear disarmament. On the contrary, especially in these troubling times we should intensify our
efforts towards this goal.
Article VI should be taken seriously. We do not agree that there is a ‘legal gap’ with regard to this
article. It is up to the NPT states to seek consensus on a common way forward in the further
implementation of this article.
Some have raised the issue of nuclear sharing. This issue was addressed when the NPT was
negotiated. At that time basing arrangements existed and were made clear to negotiating delegations
and were made public. Weapons assigned to NATO remain under national control of a nuclear weapon
state at all times and are never transferred. Therefore NATO’s basing arrangements are fully
compatible with the NPT obligations. NATO also remains fully committed to working towards a world
without nuclear weapons as confirmed in the 2012 Defence and Deterrence Posture Review and the
2014 Wales Summit.
Way forward
On the way forward, the Netherlands strongly believes that we should focus on what unites us, on
where we can find common ground to move forward. We should continue to build on the consensus on
the 2010 action plan, which was and is an ambitious undertaking. We should take stock on what has
been achieved and should have an honest debate the actions that have not yet been implemented.
Why have they not been implemented yet? Do we need to be more specific or do we need to
strengthen those actions?
We are also open for identifying new actions, provided they on bring us further on the path towards
global zero.
More concretely, together with our partners of the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative
or NPDI we have developed several proposals we could discuss on a possible way forward. WP 16
gives an overview of the NPDI proposals. Let me mention some of them:
- On transparency: we believe we should agree to a new and regular process of reporting, both for
the nuclear weapons states and the non-nuclear weapons states. Can we also agree on a common
reporting format as to be able to better compare progress made? Can we agree on other transparency
measures, for example with regard to the locations and numbers of nuclear weapons or on command
and control issues?
- On de-alerting: can we agree on further steps be taken to reduce the level of alertness of nuclear
weapons, for example with regard to targeting? Can the ‘launch on warning’ concept be taken out of
nuclear strategies?

- On the role of nuclear weapons: can we agree on steps to further reduce the role of nuclear
weapons in military doctrines?
- On FMCT: building on the final report of the GGE FMCT, we need to work on further steps towards
the negotiation of an FMCT, including the possibility of a moratorium.
- On the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapon use: we have to find ways for
incorporating this important concept together with security and stability consideration as the
underlying basis for further disarmament.
- On the principle of irreversibility: can we agree that this is our underlying principle for further
negotiations on nuclear disarmament?
- On further and accelerated reductions of nuclear arsenals: there is a need for deeper cuts in
the remaining nuclear arsenals and accelerated implementation of existing arrangements such as
newSTART. President Obama announced that the US is prepared to cut the current arsenal with one
third. Would it be possible to find agreement on this offer before the end of the current newSTART
arrangements in 2018? We strongly believe also non-strategic nuclear weapons in Europe should be
included in new reductions.
- On the INF treaty: we urge the parties to resolve current issues and to reinforce this important
disarmament treaty. We could also consider expanding the scope of the treaty.
And finally we should agree to call upon other states possessing nuclear weapons to freeze their
nuclear buildups.
Mr Chairman,
The Netherlands stands ready for a frank and honest debate on disarmament and the way forward.
Together with our partners in NPDI we will contribute constructively to this debate.
Thank you.

