PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO
THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER ONE (NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT) DEBATE
STATEMENT BY H.E. DELL HIGGIE
AMBASSADOR FOR DISARMAMENT
30 APRIL 2014
The 2010 Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty expressed its “deep
concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons”.
New Zealand is grateful for the opportunity to present to the 2014 Preparatory Conference for
the 9th Review of the NPT a report on the Joint Statement on the Humanitarian Consequences of
Nuclear Weapons which was delivered at the First Committee of UNGA 68 on 21 October 2013
and which built upon this expression of concern by the Review Conference in 2010.
The Joint Statement was delivered by New Zealand on behalf of 125 countries and, as such, is a
testament to the significant and growing international concern about the catastrophic
consequences of nuclear weapons and support for the humanitarian imperatives that underline
nuclear disarmament. A list of those countries is appended to the written text of my statement
here today.
The October 2013 Joint Statement built upon three previous group statements (delivered first
by Switzerland in 2012 at the first NPT Preparatory Conference as well as at the First
Committee in 2012, and then by South Africa at the NPT Prepcom in 2013). It followed the
hosting by Norway of the (first) Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in
March 2013.
It expressed our countries’ deep concern about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons which affect not only governments but each and every citizen of our interconnected world. It noted our belief that awareness of these catastrophic consequences must
underpin all approaches and efforts towards nuclear disarmament and that it is in the interest of
the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never again used - yet the only way to
guarantee this is through their total elimination, including through fulfilment of the objectives of
the NPT.
The humanitarian focus is now well-established on the global agenda. We welcome the
renewed resolve of the international community, together with the ICRC, international
humanitarian organisations and the crucial role of civil society, to address the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons.
This was again evident at the Second Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons hosted by Mexico in Nayarit on 13-14 February 2014 and which was attended by 146
states. We warmly welcome Austria’s announcement of a follow-up Conference, scheduled now
for 8-9 December 2014..

UNGA 68: First Committee Joint Statement on the Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear
Weapons
Delivered by Ambassador Dell Higgie, 21 October 2013
Mr Chairman
I am taking the floor on behalf of the following Member States: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, DR Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Lao PDR, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Macedonia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, my own country
New Zealand, and the Observer State the Holy See.
Our countries are deeply concerned about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons. Past experience from the use and testing of nuclear weapons has amply
demonstrated the unacceptable humanitarian consequences caused by the immense,
uncontrollable destructive capability and indiscriminate nature of these weapons. The fact-based
discussion that took place at the Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons
convened by Norway last March allowed us to deepen our collective understanding of those
consequences. A key message from experts and international organisations was that no State
or international body could address the immediate humanitarian emergency caused by a
nuclear weapon detonation or provide adequate assistance to victims.
The broad participation at the Conference, with attendance by 128 States, the ICRC, a number
of UN humanitarian organisations and civil society, reflected the recognition that the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons are a fundamental and global
concern. We warmly welcome Mexico’s announcement of a follow-up Conference, scheduled for
13-14 February 2014. We firmly believe that it is in the interests of all States to participate in
that Conference, which aims to further broaden and deepen understanding of this matter,
particularly with regard to the longer-term consequences of a nuclear-weapon detonation. We
welcome civil society’s ongoing engagement.
This work is essential, because the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons affect not
only governments, but each and every citizen of our interconnected world. They have deep
implications for human survival; for our environment; for socio-economic development; for our
economies; and for the health of future generations. For these reasons, we firmly believe that
awareness of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons must underpin all approaches
and efforts towards nuclear disarmament.
This is not, of course, a new idea. The appalling humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons
became evident from the moment of their first use, and from that moment have motivated
humanity’s aspirations for a world free from this threat, which have also inspired this
statement. The humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons have been reflected in
numerous UN resolutions, including the first resolution passed by this Assembly in 1946, and in
multilateral instruments, including the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The world’s most
eminent nuclear physicists observed as early as 1955 that nuclear weapons threaten the

continued existence of mankind and that a war with these weapons could quite possibly put an
end to the human race. The First Special Session of the General Assembly devoted to
Disarmament (SSOD-1) stressed in 1978 that “nuclear weapons pose the greatest danger to
mankind and to the survival of civilisation.” These expressions of profound concern remain as
compelling as ever. In spite of this, the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons have
not been at the core of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation deliberations for
many years.
We are therefore encouraged that the humanitarian focus is now well established on the global
agenda. The 2010 Review Conference of the NPT expressed “deep concern at the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons”. That deep concern informed the
November 26 2011 resolution of the Council of Delegates of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, and the decision last year of this General Assembly to establish an open-ended
working group to develop proposals to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament
negotiations. It underlies the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States’ call to the
international community, in August 2013, to emphasise the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons during any discussion of nuclear issues. Last month, at the High-Level Meeting
on Nuclear Disarmament, numerous leaders from around the world again evoked that deep
concern as they called for progress to be made on nuclear disarmament. Today, this statement
demonstrates the growing political support for the humanitarian focus.
It is in the interest of the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never used again,
under any circumstances. The catastrophic effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by
accident, miscalculation or design, cannot be adequately addressed. All efforts must be exerted
to eliminate the threat of these weapons of mass destruction.
The only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons will never be used again is through their total
elimination. All States share the responsibility to prevent the use of nuclear weapons, to
prevent their vertical and horizontal proliferation and to achieve nuclear disarmament, including
through fulfilling the objectives of the NPT and achieving its universality.
We welcome the renewed resolve of the international community, together with the ICRC and
international humanitarian organisations, to address the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons. By raising awareness about this issue, civil society has a
crucial role to play side-by-side with governments as we fulfil our responsibilities. We owe it to
future generations to work together to do just that, and in doing so, to rid our world of the
threat posed by nuclear weapons.

