Nigeria Country Statement at the PREPCOM, 2-12 May 2017, Vienna,
Austria.
Cluster 1 Disarmament and Security Assurances
Thank You Chair,
My delegation appreciates all the efforts you have expended in
leading our discussion so far and we restate our confidence in your
ability to take this process forward. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the Venezuelan delegation on behalf of the non
Aligned Movement and by Sweden on behalf of the De-Alerting Group.s
2.
On the issue of Disarmament and Security Assurances,
Nigeria’s view is unchanged. As a non-nuclear weapon state, Nigeria has
and will continue to take its obligations under the NPT seriously. For us,
the nuclear weapons option was never contemplated in the first place.
Nigeria’s basic position has always been that as long as Nuclear
Weapons exist, they constitute a threat to humanity.
3.
In this context, the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of a
Nuclear Weapons detonation in today’s world can best be imagined. It is
for this reason that Nigeria holds the view that the most effective and
credible guarantee against the threat of the use of nuclear weapons lies
in their complete and total elimination.
4.
Pursuant to this goal and cognisant of the lack of progress on
disarmament expressed clearly by the stalemate of the Conference on
Disarmament and the nearly five decades journey of the NPT which has
not resulted in the ultimate goal of disarmament, Nigeria in concert with
other similarly minded countries successfully got Resolution L.71 passed
at the General Assembly in 2016 with overwhelming support from
Member States of the United Nations. Consequently, the efforts to
negotiate a binding treaty banning Nuclear Weapons are on- going in
New York.
5.
When successfully negotiated and in force, that treaty would be a
further testament to the shared global aspiration for nuclear
disarmament. It is our hope that Nuclear Weapon States would take

adequate note that the international community has achieved an
agreement of the minds, (consensus ad idem) that in today’s world,
Nuclear Weapons have no place. Accordingly, we look forward to clear,
concrete and transparent actions by Nuclear Weapon States on their
measurable and verifiable commitments towards Nuclear Disarmament
at the earliest possible date.
6.
In this connection, Nigeria continues to support the de-alerting
initiative as a confidence building measure and as a pragmatic approach
to disarmament. We are of the view that de-alerting could provide the
much needed signal that nuclear weapon states take their
responsibilities seriously in the lead to the 2020 Review Conference.
7.
Nigeria reminds all, that the grand bargain of nuclear nonproliferation, nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear energy
on which the NPT was construed, embodies the recognition that the
indefinite possession of nuclear weapons by some state could undermine
efforts to prevent their proliferation. Let there be no mistake- the moral
watershed in the clarion call for the non-proliferation and eventual
elimination of these weapons of extreme terror, is the recognition that
no one could claim to be safe and secure as long as there exists
thousands of nuclear warheads, and others are making spirited efforts to
acquire or produce more of these lethal arsenal
Mr Chair
8.
My delegation continues to look forward to the actualisation of
commitments expressed by Nuclear Weapon States to accelerate
concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament and we
urge them to respond to the urgent call contained in Action 5 of the
“action plan of the 2010 Review Conference on disarmament of nuclear
weapons” and report to the Review Process of the Treaty on the
progress made in this regard.
On Security Assurances
9.
While we continue working towards achieving a nuclear weapons
free world, we must not under estimate the value of incremental

success. For us, incremental success means continuing progress on
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and an unconditional
granting of negative security assurances to non-nuclearweapon states.

Mr. Chairman
11. We are gathered in Vienna to work assiduously for a successful
2020 Review Process of the NPT in order to provide the platform for a
peaceful and secure world for present and future generations. It is an
achievable target and Nigeria is all for it and ready to work for it.
I thank you

