STATEMENT
BY

HIS EXCELLENCY,
AMBASSADOR AUDU KADIRI
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE,
PERMANENT MISSION OF NIGERIA
TOTHE
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE IN GENEVA
AT

THE SECOND PR EPARATORY COMMITTEE MEETING
(PREPCOM) OF THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE
PARTIES TO THE TR EATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION

OF NUCLEA R WEAPONS

GENEYA, APRIL 26 2018

Please check against delivery

1

Cluster 1 Disarmament and Security Assurances
Thank You Chair,
My delegation appreciates all the efforts you have expended in
leading our discussions so far and we restate our confidence in your
ability to take this process forward. We align ourselves with the
statements delivered by the Indonesian delegation on behalf of the Non
Aligned Movement and by Malaysia on behalf of the De-Alerting Group.
2.
On the issue of Disarmament and Security Assurances,
Nigeria's view remains unchanged. As a non-nuclear weapon state,
Nigeria has and will continue to take its obligations under the NPT
seriously. For us, the nuclear weapons option was never contemplated in
the first place. Nigeria1s basic position has always been that as long as
Nuclear Weapons exist, they constitute a threat to international security
and indeed all of humanity.
3.
In this context, the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of a
Nuclear Weapons detonation in today 1s world can best be imagined. It is
for this reason that Nigeria holds the view that the most effective and
credible guarantee against the threat of the use of nuclear weapons Hes
in their complete and total elimination through a verifiable and
irreversible programme of global disarmament.
4.
Pursuant to thi s goal and cognisant of the lethargy on
disarmament expressed clearly by the stalemate of the Conference on
Disarmament and the nearly five decades journey of the NPT which has
not resulted in the ultimate goal of disarmament. It is for this reason
that Nigeria in concert with like-minded countries successfully concluded
negotiations and adopted the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in New York in July 2017. Consequently, several states
including Nigeria have signed on and are now in the process of
ratification.
5.
The overwhelming numbers of member states of the UN, Parties
to NPT, who support the TPNW is in our view a further testament to the

2

shared global aspiration for nuclear disarmament. It is our hope that
Nuclear Weapon States would take adequate note that the international
community has achieved an agreement of the minds, (consensus ad
idem) that in today's world, Nuclear Weapons have no place.
Accordingly, we look forward to clear, concrete and transparent actions
by Nuclear Weapon States on their measurable, transparent and
verifiable commitments towards Nuclear Disarmament at the earliest
possible date.
6.
Furthermore, pending the achievement of the ideal of
disarmament, Nigeria continues to support the de-alerting initiative as a
confidence building measure and as a pragmatic approach to
disarmament. We are of the view that de-alerting could provide the
much needed signal that nuclear weapon states take their
responsibilities seriously in the leading to the 2020 Review Conference.
7.
Nigeria reminds all, that the grand bargain of nuclear · nonproliferation, nuclear disarmament and peaceful uses of nuclear energy
on which the NPT was construed, embodies the recognition that the
indefinite possession of nuclear weapons by some states undermines
efforts to prevent their proliferation. For the avoidance of doubt, the
moral watershed in the clarion call for the non-proliferation and eventual
elimination of these weapons of extreme terror, is the recognition that
no one could claim to be safe and secure as long as there exists
thousands of nuclear warheads, while others are making spirited efforts
to acquire or produce more of these lethal arsenal

Mr Chairman,
8.
My delega~ion continues to look forward to the actualisation of
commitments expressed by Nuclear Weapon States to accelerate
concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament and we
urge them to respond to the urgent call contained in Action 5 of the
"Action Plan of the 2010 Review Conference on disarmament of nuclear
weapons" and report to the Review Process of the Treaty on the
progress made in this regard.

3

On Security Assurances
9.
While we continue wor king towards achieving a nuclear weapons
free world, we must not underestimate the value of incremental success.
For us, incremental succ~ss means continuing progress on nudear
disarmament, non-proliferation, sustained cooperation in peaceful uses
and an unconditional granting of negative security assurances to

non-nuclear- weapon states in a legally binding framework
without further delay .

Mr. Chairman,

10. We are gathered in Geneva to work assiduously for a successful
2020 Review Process of the NPT in order to provide the platform for a
peaceful and secure world for the present and future generations. It is
an achievable target and Nigeria is all for it and ready to work for it. You
can count on my delegation's support.

I thank you.

4

