Mr. Chair,
The overall objective of the NPT, as laid out in its preamble and not least in Article VI, is
to achieve total elimination of nuclear arsenals. However, forty years after the Nuclear
Non Proliferation Treaty entered into force we are still living in a world with nuclear
weapons.
The NPT Review Conference in 2010 brought concrete achievements, in the shape of a
detailed Action Plan. But only implementation will bring us from diplomatic
achievement to results on the ground.
Against this background, we do appreciate the strong willingness expressed by states
parties during the general debate to fulfil their obligations under the NPT Action Plan.
But, we still look forward to the concrete and measurable implementing steps that will
bring the nuclear weapons states to this end.
Mr Chair,
Norway subscribes unequivocally to the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons, and we
would like to see even more ambitious steps on nuclear disarmament than the ones
embodied in the 2010 Action plan.
We were pleased by the new START accord. But its greater value will be as a stepping
stone toward a more intensified disarmament process, covering all categories of
weapons, and involving all nuclear weapons states.
By 2015, the total number of war-heads must be substantially lower than today. It goes
without saying that disarmament must be pursued on the principles of transparency,
verification and irreversibility. Non-nuclear weapons could take part in these verification
processes to achieve stronger confidence in the processes and results. We are in this
respect grateful for the cooperation with the UK through our joint verification project.
Mr Chair,
The final elimination of nuclear weapons will in the end be a consequence of several
reinforcing factors.
As mentioned in our general statement, we are convinced that State Parties must now
devote increased attention to the humanitarian effects of nuclear weapons and to
International Humanitarian Law. We expect this issue, Mr Chair, to be brought forward
to the 2015 Review Conference.
Another important factor would be to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in existing
security policies. A key element would be to strengthen the use of negative security
assurances, and the NPT would be one logical framework to do so.

While serving crucial non-proliferation objectives, nuclear weapons free zones are also
essential steps towards full elimination of nuclear weapons. We must continue our
efforts to consolidate existing nuclear weapons free zones, and intensify efforts to reach
a zone free of WMDs in the Middle East and reaching a de-nuclearised Korean
peninsula.
Likewise, it is essential to make real progress in securing the entry into force of the
CTBT. So far we lack the momentum for the treaty’s speedy entry into force. We again
urge all annex II states to ratify the CTBT without delay, and all states not to take any
action which may undermine the purpose of the CTBT.
FMCT could be an important qualitative disarmament measure, but its full potential
would not be reached if it is limited only to future production of fissile material for
weapons purposes. We must also address the issue of existing stocks.
It is also necessary that all States Parties to the NPT can contribute to eventual FMCT
negotiations. Today, this issue is kept exclusively on the agenda of a limited institution
with only 65 member states, in which negotiations are blocked by a non-NPT country. It
is regrettable that this is an indicative example of the major challenges we face with the
existing disarmament machinery.
Mr. Chair,
Our primary task is to ensure the full implementation of the Action Plan. We had the
political will to adopt it two years ago, and now we must mobilize the necessary political
will to ensure its full implementation. In doing this, we cannot let non-States Parties set
the pace. Effective multilateralism in disarmament and non-proliferation is more needed
than ever.
Thank you!

