	  

	  

NEW ZEALAND
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
PREPARATORY	  COMMITTEE	  FOR	  THE	  2015	  REVIEW	  CONFERENCE	  OF	  
THE	  PARTIES	  TO	  THE	  TREATY	  ON	  THE	  NON-­‐PROLIFERATION	  OF	  
NUCLEAR	  WEAPONS	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
CLUSTER	  ONE:	  NUCLEAR	  DISARMAMENT	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
STATEMENT	  BY	  DELL	  HIGGIE	  
AMBASSADOR	  FOR	  DISARMAMENT	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
3	  MAY	  2012	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr Chairman
In addition to this national statement under cluster 1, I am pleased also to associate
my delegation with the statement made by South Africa on behalf of the New
Agenda Coalition and which outlined in some depth the Coalition’s priorities as we
embark on this new review cycle. We are confident that the working papers
presented by the NAC – a general paper on nuclear disarmament as well as a more
specific paper on nuclear disarmament verification – will contribute positively to our
ongoing deliberations in the lead up to 2015.
Mr Chairman
The significance of the review cycle process was put very eloquently by High
Representative Kane earlier this week when she remarked that without it the NPT
would “be but an empty shell, without any effective means of maintaining genuine
accountability for the fulfilment of commitments and legal obligations under the
Treaty. It is the review process that enables States Parties collectively to take stock
of progress made and to identify new achievements that are needed”.
The 22 action points on nuclear disarmament contained in the 2010 outcome
document are our touchstone, our guide, for the progress necessary under this NPT
pillar during this current review cycle – and they represent, too, a launching point for
our ambitions for the next cycle.
In setting out a path for further action on nuclear disarmament, the 2010 Action Plan
reaffirms many previous undertakings – including those which were part of the
significant outcome of 2000 – and which form part of the fabric of the NPT.
Mr Chairman
The achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons has long been a matter of
fundamental importance to New Zealand. With this in mind I would like to highlight
some elements of our 22 nuclear disarmament action points which are of particular
importance to us.
New Zealand is pleased to continue working as a member of the De-alerting Group
in order to promote the lowered operational readiness of nuclear weapons. The
statement to be delivered by our current Coordinator, Switzerland, on behalf of the
Group will clearly underscore the importance of progress on this element of the 2010
Action Plan.
Lowering the operational readiness of nuclear weapons systems would lower the risk
of an accidental or unintentional launch of nuclear weapons. Importantly, it would
also represent a very practical application of a diminished role for nuclear weapons
in defence and security strategies. New Zealand continues to call on all nuclear
weapon States to take urgent steps to reduce their reliance on nuclear weapons as
an integral step towards the achievement of a nuclear weapon-free world.
New Zealand was pleased that the 2010 NPT outcome reaffirmed the essential role
of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty within the nuclear disarmament and

non-proliferation regime. We are strong proponents of the CTBT’s entry into force
and we welcome recent ratifications of the Treaty, particularly that of Annex 2 State,
Indonesia. We are also very pleased at the recent signature of the Treaty by Niue,
our neighbour in the Pacific. We continue to call on all States that have not yet done
so, particularly the remaining Annex 2 States, to ratify the CTBT without any further
delay.
The 2010 Action Plan contains several action points related to the Conference on
Disarmament. New Zealand remains deeply concerned at the ongoing impasse in
the CD which has for too long failed to meet its negotiating mandate notwithstanding recent intensive efforts.
If CD members cannot commence
substantive work then, as the UN Secretary General remarked recently, “the General
Assembly must exercise its primary responsibility in carrying forward the
disarmament process”. The CD’s dysfunctionality cannot be allowed to stand in the
way of progress on the disarmament agenda.
New Zealand welcomed the inclusion in the 2010 outcome of several action points
on transparency and accountability and which will assist us all in measuring progress
in meeting the Treaty’s objectives. We recall in particular, the emphasis given to the
need for nuclear weapon States to agree on a standard reporting template and to
determine appropriate intervals in which to report on their nuclear arsenals and their
efforts on nuclear disarmament. We urge the nuclear weapon States to take these
steps as a matter of priority.
More generally, in terms of Action 20 of the 2010 outcome, New Zealand has
submitted a report to this PrepCom outlining our own efforts to meet our obligations
under the Treaty; we encourage other States parties to do the same.
Mr Chairman
We are honoured this week by the presence of many Hibakusha who know only too
well the devastating – or as the 2010 Action Plan puts it – “catastrophic”
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. Their first-hand experiences should
leave us in no doubt that the use of nuclear weapons would be unconscionable.
There has been widespread interest in the Action Plan’s acknowledgement of “the
need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law”. As High Representative Kane observed earlier this
week, “it is now beyond question that international humanitarian law has already
arrived here in the NPT review process – and it is here to stay”.
The Action Plan has usefully built on language from the International Court of
Justice. We are pleased to be associated with the statement delivered by
Switzerland earlier this week on behalf of 14 States and which emphasised the
humanitarian dimension of nuclear disarmament.
That statement referenced the recent resolution of the Council of Delegates of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. I note, Mr Chairman, that
during next week – on the 8th of May – we observe the World Red Cross Red
Crescent Day. My Government would not wish to let this International Day pass

here without acknowledging the very important work done by the ICRC, and by the
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, to promote global respect for IHL.
It is clear that the further elaboration of the IHL element of the Action Plan will be a
focus of our efforts in the years leading to 2015. The announcement by Norway that
it will host a meeting in 2013 on the humanitarian impact of the use of nuclear
weapons is also to be welcomed.
Mr Chairman
I have spoken about the impact on us all of listening to the testimony of those who
have themselves experienced the horrific impact of nuclear weapons. We must also
pay heed to the views of younger generations – it is their future that we have an
opportunity to influence for better, or for worse. It is very pleasing to see such a
strong group of young people engaged here at this PrepCom and I had the pleasure
to meet with many of them earlier this week.
New Zealand continues to value the role of civil society in keeping nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation high on the international agenda.
Their
assistance is invaluable to governments in helping us to bring to fruition the promise
of the Action Plan and our shared goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.

