PHILIPPINES
PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
Main Committee I (Nuclear Disarmament)
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
4 May 2015
United Nations, New York

Mr. Chairman ,
On behalf of the Philippine Delegation, allow me to extend our warm
congratulations to you for presiding over this crucial Main Committee of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference. Bearing in mind the challenging task before us, we assure you of
the Philippines' support as well as assistance in finding the necessary middle ground
that will take us a step closer to our goal of nuclear disarmament.
The Philippines aligns with the statement delivered by Iran, on behalf of the NonAligned Movement (NAM).
The Philippines has always pushed for balanced implementation of the Treaty's
three pillars. Regrettably, while we are making much headway in the areas of nonproliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the execution of our commitments
and obligations under the first pillar remains lacking .
Progress in the field of nuclear disarmament continues to stall despite the fact
that more than ever, the world has become fully aware of the humanitarian
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons.
That, as concluded in the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons convened since 2013, the world has no capacity to address, in an adequate
and immediate manner, the humanitarian emergency or long-term consequences that
will ensue after a nuclear weapon detonation.
The Philippines lauds non-nuclear weapon States for acting on their NPT
commitments by clearly stating the case against nuclear weapons and promoting
nuclear disarmament education through these Conferences.

PHILIPPINE MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

556

FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY

10036 •

TEL.

(212) 764-1300 •

FAX

(212J 840-8602

Clearly, these Conferences have not distracted us from the goal but have in fact
made us even more aware of what needs to be done.
Time and again, we have heard a set of prescribed steps or a single approach
toward a world free of nuclear weapons. While the Philippines supports these specific
steps, there is nothing written in the NPT that obliges us to limit our efforts within these
measures. There is also nothing in the Treaty that sets pre-conditions before we can
pursue nuclear disarmament actions.
Article VI is clear - we must pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to
nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under
strict and effective international control.
The Treaty is also clear about the time given to us to fulfill our obligations. Fortyfive years since the NPT entered into force, we have failed to meet the "early date"
requirement of the Treaty. It is high time that we set concrete actions under agreed
benchmarks and timelines:
The Philippines believes that a Nuclear Weapons Convention that is
comprehensive and universal, or a series of mutually reinforcing legal instruments with
a credible system of verification, would allow us to fulfill our Article VI obligations.
The Philippines will continue to push for such a Convention while at the same
time stressing the urgent need for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test ban Treaty (CTBT)
to enter into force and for negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) to
start.
While we await progress on these two crucial treaties, the Philippines stresses
the need for a firm agreement on a moratorium on all nuclear testing as well as
universal, unconditional and legally binding instruments on security assurances to nonnuclear weapon States.
Mr. Chair,
The Philippines urges nuclear weapon States to adopt a No First Use Policy to
demonstrate good faith pending progress in nuclear disarmament measures. The
current crises the international community continues to face and the current global
political climate cause grave concern. These crises, however, do not and should not
give renewed meaning to the Cold War concept of deterrence. On the contrary, these
crises must compel us even more to immediately eliminate nuclear weapons so they
may never be used, be it by accident or by purpose.
The Philippines also calls on the nuclear weapon States to sign and ratify
Protocols to Nuclear Weapons Free Zones. In Southeast Asia, we will continue to work

with our partners in ASEAN and the P5 for the latter to finally become parties to the
Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone (SEANWFZ), without reservations.
In closing Mr. Chair, the Philippines would like to express its readiness to engage
as we consider the many commendable working papers that we have at our disposal.
We are surely not lacking in ideas. It is our hope that this Review Conference will be
one that will drive us to finally transform these ideas into actions. Thank you.

