Mr. President,
First of all 1 wish to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation on your election to the Chairman of the Main Committee I of the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to offer you our full support and cooperation for the fulfillment of your important duties.
Poland adheres fully to the European Union statement presented in this Committee. In addition to this I take the floor to highlight some issues which Poland believes are of importance at the national level. These are issues and activities related to non-proliferation and disarmament and include the Proliferation Security Initiative, the G-8 Global Partnership against proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, co-operation with and support for the International Atomic Energy Agency, enhancing safeguards and contributing to the effective implementation of NPT.
Poland shares the view that a continued symmetry and balanced approach to both nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation should apply in the years to come. There are different suggestions and ideas as to how this might best be done. For us, the principal criterion continues to be preservation of the integrity and effectiveness of the regime. We are concerned that issues of withdrawal from the Treaty and possible non-compliance with the safeguards system obligation and, more seriously, with the NPT provisions continue to pose the greatest challenge world-wide.
Mr. President,
Over the recent years the international community has considered and proposed many measures and initiatives to reverse the increasing challenges to security caused by the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and means of their delivery. They include promotion of existing and introducing new international measures as well as multilateral and bilateral mechanisms in three areas: conflict prevention, strengthening of international disarmament and non-proliferation agreements and export controls.
It is ever more evident that security is a global concern and old weapons-related threats have been multiplied with the emergence of new dangers.
It was our very commitment to effective multilateralism that drove us to actively engage ourselves in the framework of the PS1. We consider the Initiative an encouraging sign of the growing need for more co-operation in forestalling proliferation.
Poland perceives its role as a strong supporter of active non-proliferation policies. That is why Poland eagerly participates in the G-8 Global Partnership against proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and is actively involved in the implementation of the EU-policy on non- proliferation. These are the reasons that explain Poland's joining the PSI and organizing the First Anniversary Proliferation Security Meeting.
Poland considers the adoption and presentation of national reports called for by the Security Council Resolution 1540 last year as an important contribution to the transparency of the efforts made and steps taken in the area of non-proliferation.
The overriding national security interests of States would be served in particular by the universalization of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Multilateralism is becoming more important than ever, Multilateral arrangements in various domains offer both an assurance of equal treatment and an opportunity to contribute to common goals. Multilateralism strengthens the freedom of action of individual States and, while increasing, the degree of their responsibility.
The end of the Cold War era has been a source of, and a sound reason for, satisfaction throughout the entire world community. A contest between the two superpowers no longer dictates the course of history. This has also had an impact on the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The world has become a safer place. Yet euphoria is fading, giving way to a sober evaluation of events. The question remains: "Is the "peace dividend" being actually paid?", "What have we done to materialize it?" While there are many pressing issues confronting the Treaty today the NPT still remains the cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and therefore international security as well.
Mr. President,
The Model Additional Protocol, if and only when universally adopted by NPT states, can live up to its billing as an indispensable non-proliferation tool. Whether it will in fact make sue1! a contribution depends both on the political will of the IAEA and the number, and identity, of states adhering to the protocol.
Poland believes that enhancing the IAEA and the system of financing the fulfillment of its tasks, developing its competencies by accession of all States to and practical implementation of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and the Model Additional Protocols should be realized by the international community as a priority in order to improve the nuclear security. The establishment of the suggested Special Committee on Safeguards and Verification would serve the same goal
In the context of nuclear safety States should be urged :o make every effort possible to ensure the positive outcome of the Diplomatic Conference, to be held in Vienna on 4-8 July 2005, that will consider and adopt amendments to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
Poland echoes the call of the EU for the earliest possible entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty as well as for launching negotiations of a nondiscriminatory and universal Treaty banning the production of fissile material (FMCT).
Mr. President,
Against the backdrop of the many challenges facing the NPT regime, the outcome of the present Conference should constitute a real achievement for the international community not only for today but also for the future.
Poland believes that only by a thorough examination of all issues concerned the 2005 Conference may be encouraged to bring to light evidence of a wide range of agreement among State-Parties on various issues concerning the implementation of the NPT provisions.
Thank you for your attention.

