Statement
Republic of Poland
Cluster I - Nuclear disarmament

Mr. Chairman,

Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union within the framework of Cluster I.
I would also like to draw attention to the working documents issued by the EU
and the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative that are relevant to the
subject of nuclear non-proliferation. Allow me to add a couple of remarks in my
national capacity.

Mr. Chairman,
For Poland, the nuclear disarmament is an important element of our security
policy. We share the commitment of the world without nuclear weapons and in
this context we stress the uniqueness of the NPT as the only credible
instrument to pursue this goal.
But to achieve this goal all State Parties must fully adhere to all the provisions
of the NPT.
We call for further reductions in the global stockpiles of nuclear weapons, but
at the same time we cannot ignore reality - progress in disarmament is not
possible without creation of appropriate security conditions. In other words
serious engagement of Nuclear Weapons States as well as addressing
legitimated security concerns are conditions sine qua non of any real
advancement in the process.

Trust and confidence are indispensable for nuclear disarmament. They are
difficult to attain and easy to squander. In this context we regret that trust and

confidence in negative security assurances have been severely weakened with
the breach of the Budapest Memorandum.

Mr. Chairman,
In our conviction only through real engagement of all states in credible
initiatives in a good faith, we could make real and stable progress toward
nuclear disarmament. At this point let me stress Poland serious undertakings
toward our common goal.

1. Poland, as has been decided at the beginning of our session will be
chairing the second Preparatory Committee in 2018
2. We are committed to transparency and verification which we consider
prerequisites of any real disarmament process:
-/ In this context we have been actively working in .
-/ We have been also engaged, nationally and multilaterally in efforts to
make nuclear arsenal, in particular so-called sub-strategic ones more
transparent and verifiable.
-/ we supported the 2016 General Assembly Resolution on Nuclear

Disarmament Verification and we welcome the establishment of the
Group of Governmental Experts to consider the role of verification in
advancing nuclear disarmament.
3. Poland also is in favour of starting negotiation in the Conference on
Disarmament of a Treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices (FMCT). In this
regard we will participate in work of the High Level Expert Preparatory
Group, whose mandate is to make recommendations on substantial
elements for a future Treaty.

Mr. Chairman,
At the end of my intervention I would like to stress, that we are well aware how
difficult and complicated is achieving world without nuclear weapons and what
is at stake.
Like no other state in this room, Poland lived for decades under the imminent
threat of the nuclear annihilation. We know the risk, but we are realistic, and
that is why we strongly believe there are no quick fixes, no miraculous

solutions, but hard and laborious work, step by step, block by block, to create,
in an inclusive manner, the conditions which will lead us through nuclear
disarmament towards safer and more stable world for all of us.
Thank you,

