REPUBLIC OF POLAND
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

TEL. (212) 744-2506

750 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017

Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY

H.B. AMBASSADOR ADAM BUGAJSKI
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
TO THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA

2015 REvmw CONFERENCE OF THE PARTms TO THE TREATY
ON NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

MAIN COMMITTEE I

NEW YORK, MAY lsr, 2015

Mr. Chairman,

At the outset let me congratulate you on your appointment as the Chair of the Main
Committee l. I wish to assure you of the Polish Delegation's support and cooperation in
fulfilment of your important mandate.
Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union.
I would also like to draw your attention to the working papers submitted
by the Non-proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
At the same time, I would like to refer to some elements related to the nuclear
disarmament, we consider particularly important from the national perspective.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

70 years ago the United Nations General Assembly adopted the first ever resolution
related to nuclear energy and nuclear disarmament.
Since then pursuing complete nuclear disarmament is a commonly acknowledged goal.
The shared responsibility of the international community is to find a common ground
on how this goal should be achieved.
The Plan adopted in 2010 has set a concrete Actions in achieving this goal. After five
years it is time to take a stock of it.
We join others in noting concrete steps that nuclear-weapon States undertook to reduce
their nuclear stockpiles. In this regard, we particularly welcome the ongoing
implementation of the New START agreement. We hope this positive momentum will
be maintained in the future.
At the same time, we note with concern the last year development in Ukraine and
Russia's violation of its own commitment to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine under the Budapest
Memorandum of 1994 on security assurance in connection with Ukraine's accession to
the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon state.

Referring to the statement of the EU, we call on Russia to preserve the viability
of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) by ensuring full and verifiable
compliance. That is especially important in a case of the treaty, which was an exemplar
step towards nuclear disarmament and fulfilling of the obligations under Article VI
of the NPT by eliminating an entire class of weapons and becoming important element
of European security architecture, as well as international security and stability.
States with largest arsenals take the greatest responsibility in the process of reducing
the stockpiles. We strongly support a call for further reductions in numbers of nuclear
weapons. We also stress the need to include all categories of nuclear weapons in future
talks between the US and Russia. Therefore, we support the inclusion of non-strategic
nuclear weapons into further reduction talks and would like to see specific reference to
this issue in the outcome document of this Conference, as proposed in the Working
Paper presented by the NPDI.
A set of practical and concrete measures should be undertaken in order to bring us closer
to the world free of nuclear weapons. Transparency is one of them.
The process of further reductions must be accompanied by the increased transparency
of information relating to nuclear weapons. As we welcome relevant reports presented
by the PS (as well as their increased interaction), we recognize a growing need
to continuously improve the transparency.
The increased transparency serves as a confidence-building measure. If exercised by all
Member States it will create a common ground for mutual trust, better understanding of
various national positions and interests that has to be taken into account in the process
leading to complete disarmament.
Poland has again submitted the relevant national report to the Review Conference.
We intend to do that also in the next review cycle. We encourage states to make use of
the reporting template as proposed in the relevant NPDI Working Paper.
Poland would like this conference to suggest a whole set of confidence-building
measure. The basis for this might be a working paper submitted to the 2014 PrepCom
by the group of states, including Poland (NPT/CONF.2015/PC.III/WP.23), titled
"Building blocks for a world without nuclear weapons".

In this context, Poland would like to applaud a new initiative of International Partnership
for Nuclear Disarmament Verification. We appreciate the initiative that will serve as a
complementary tool to the ongoing processes within the NPT regime, bringing us stepby-step closer to the world without nuclear weapons.

Mr. Chairman,
We are convinced that only by building blocks, with an active involvement
of all member states, we will be able to move nuclear disarmament forward.
The measures in that regard have to be comprehensive, inclusive and solution-oriented.

Thank you.

