The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapon s, Secood Sess ion
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

Cluster I (Disarmament)

Thank you, Mr. Chairman ,

With the ever chan ging international security environment, divergent views on
'

.

specific issues of nuclear disarmament have become more prominent than ever.
Nevertheless, all of us here would agree the NPT has played a central role in
maintaining global stabil ity aiid our common security for nearly fifty years
since its entry into force . It is indeed hard to sugg est even in hindsight any
I

altem~tive regim e that could held at bay proliferation of nucl ear weapons while
guaranteeing peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

It firmly remains a cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation and a foundation
of the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. In our joint endeavor toward a world free
of nuclear weapons, our legitim ate qu estion therefore -is not whether the
mechanism is still relevant but how we can strengthen and bett er implem ent it.

All thr.ee pillar s of the NPT need to be implemented effectiv ely to enhanc e the
credibility and integrity of the mechanism as a whole. As the implementation of
each pillar is mutually reinfo rcin g, nuclear-weapon states must do more about
the relatively slow progress in nuclear disarmament. They must continue to
carry out their commitment undertaken in Art icle VI of the Treaty, in particular,
by reducing th eir nuclear arsenals and enh ancing transparency. and confidencebuilding measures.

As the saying goes , R ome was not built in a day. We must remember it was not
only vehement political will but also cool-h eaded security analysis that enabled

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 A pril-4 May 2018, Geneva

the reduction of the number of nuclear weapons in existence to a third of what it
was at its height. Our collective pursuit to a global zero requires a progressive
and realistic

approach.

We must address existing and emerging nuclear

challenges drawing on our accomplishments made within the NPT and also with
the full engagement of nuclear-weapon states.

In this regard, my delegation is of the view that the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons crafted without the participation of nuclear-weapon states
cannot but bear intrinsic limitation. What is important for all of us at this stage
is that our common cause for a world free of nuclear weapons remains
unchanged. It is also imperative that the non-proliferation and peaceful use of
nuclear energy that all of us have enjoyed in the NPT not be undermined but be
safeguarded and further strengthened.

Let me emphasize that my delegation believes that all of us share a common
understanding on the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use of
nuclear weapons. Our future generations deserve a peaceful world without fear
for a nuclear war. In this vein, it is critical that the 13 practical steps of the 2000
Review Conference Final Document as well as the 2010 Action Plan be put into
practice in a realistic and progressive manner.

The recent decision

of the Conference

on Disarmament

to resume

its

substantive discussion in subsidiary bodies provides us with a valuable chance
in this regard. It is our sincere hope that the discussion will help reach an
understanding on the areas of commonalities, deepen technical discussions and
broaden areas of agreement on core issues the CD deals with.

2

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

We also look forward to the contribution that the Group of Governmental
Experts on nuclear disarmament verification will make. Verification of nuclear
warheads dismantlement is an uncharted area in spite of its indispensability for
a verifiable nuclear disarmament. In this context, my delegation welcomes the
substantive progress made by the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disannament Verification (IPNDV) with the participation of both non-nuclear
and nuclear-weapon states.

On the other hand, however, negotiation of the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty
and the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)
are long overdue in spite of an overwhelming support from the international
community. Considering many benefits that they could provide not only for
nuclear disarmament but also for non-proliferation, we have to step up our
efforts to bring them into fruition as soon as possible.

Mr. Chair,

Surprisingly enough, in light of heightened tens ion just a few months ago on the
Korean Peninsula, the window of opportunity to resolve peacefully the North
Korean nuclear issue was opened by the inter-Korean dialogue on the occasion
of the Pyeong-chang Olympic Winter Games. The inter-Korean summit, which
will take place tomorrow, has the denuclearization issue high on the agenda.
The US-DPRK summit is also expected to be held soon.

We must seize this hard-won momentum to denuclearize North Korea and bring
lasting peace to the Korean Peninsula and beyond. The successful resolution of
the North Korean nuclear issue will contribute to strengthening the NPT regime.
3

The Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Second Session
23 April-4 May 2018, Geneva

The Republic of Korea will do its utmost to bring North Korea back to the NPT
obligations and IAEA safeguards and ultimately achieve its complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization.

In this process, we will continue to closely

cooperate with the international community and also count on its full support.

Either denuclearization

on the Korean Peninsula or disarmament at the global

level is not a low hanging fruit. Nevertheless, pessimism will only be selffulfilling. Only our perseverance and patience will enable us to take one step
closer to the heartfelt vision of a world free of nuclear weapons. Thank you.
/End/

4

