THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
335 East 45th Street, New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel (212) 439-4000, Fax (212) 986-1083

Statement by Ambassador AHN, Young-jip
Head of delegation to the Conference on Disarmament
Republic of Korea
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Nuclear Disarmament and Security Assurances
(Cluster I)
4 May 2015
New York
<Check against Delivery>

Mr. Chairman,

At the outset, let me join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of
the Chair of the Main Committee I. My delegation stands ready to assist you in bringing
about a successful conclusion of this important Review Conference.

First of all, the Republic of Korea shares the international community's ultimate goal of
achieving a world without nuclear weapons. Without a doubt, nuclear disarmament is crucial
in reducing the risk of the accidental or intentional use of nuclear weapons, and remains the
core of the bargain the State Parties reached during the NPT Review and Extension
1

Conference of 1995.

My delegation firmly believes that the three pillars of the NPT should be pursued in a
mutually reinforcing manner. In particular, we see clearly that nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation commitments are complementary. In this sense, preserving the balance between
them is vital to the credibility and integrity of the NPT regime.

Mr. Chairman,

The Republic of Korea notes the progress made thus far by the nuclear-weapons states with
regard to the disarmament pillar. We look forward to a sincere implementation of the
commitments to reduce their nuclear arsenal as agreed by the United States and Russia and
laid out in the New START treaty. These two states are also strongly encouraged to negotiate
for further reductions of their stockpiles across all categories of nuclear weapons. We also
appreciate the unilateral reduction measures taken by France and the United Kingdom in this
regard. My delegation believes that further steps could be taken by nuclear-weapons states.

While there is no doubt regarding the common value and importance of the NPT as an
essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament, we are witnessing growing
differences between nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states over the pace at
which the 2010 NPT Action Plan is being implemented. Considering this situation,
transparency and confidence-building is a prerequisite for achieving the ultimate objective of
a world without nuclear weapons.

2

Mr. Chairman,

The PS Process seems to have made modest but continued progress in terms of confidencebuilding in this field. Nuclear-weapon states should continue to engage not only among
themselves but also with non-nuclear-weapon states. We take note of the national reports
submitted by the PS states during the current review cycle and the efforts by States Parties to
develop a standard reporting form. We anticipate more detailed and specific reports and
updates that build upon these efforts.

We also note the PS glossary of key nuclear terms to be submitted to the Conference, which
will serve as foundation for future multilateral nuclear disarmament agreements. It is our
hope that the nuclear-weapon states demonstrate the continued relevance of the PS Process
by setting out a work plan detailing the initiatives they will pursue in the next NPT review
cycle. By doing so, we believe that the process could help lay the groundwork for more
ambitious disarmament endeavors.

Mr. Chairman,

As an ardent supporter of the NPT regime, the Republic of Korea supports robust
implementation of Article VI. In this sense, we welcome various initiatives to develop
efficient verification capabilities related to nuclear disarmament. We commend the UKNorway initiative on the verification of warhead dismantlement and welcome the
International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification recently initiated by the
United States. We believe that these initiatives will formulate a practical and durable
framework for international cooperation in this field, and thereby strengthen the NPT regime.
3

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation shares the view that proper negative security assurances by the nuclearweapon states could alleviate the security concerns of non-nuclear-weapon states.

However, we uphold the principle that these assurances are not natural rights for all nonnuclear-weapon states and that they should be applied only to those who faithfully comply
with the NPT.

The early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is
imperative in order to strengthen the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. We call
upon those states that have not yet ratified this Treaty, in particular, the remaining eight
Annex II states, to do so without any further delay.

As a part of our contribution to the CTBT Article XIV process, the Republic of Korea would
like to announce that it will be hosting the CTBT Group of Eminent Persons' (GEM)
meeting to facilitate the early entry into force of the Treaty. The Group of Eminent Persons'
meeting will take place in Seoul between 25 and 26 of June of this year.

Mr. Chairman,

As a matter of priority, the Republic of Korea also supports the commencement of
negotiations on the treaty banning the production of fissile material (FMCT) in the
Conference on Disarmament (CD). We welcome the recently adopted report by the UN
Group of Governmental Experts (OGE) that contains substantial recommendations on
4

possible aspects of an FMCT. We also note that France recently presented a draft treaty,
which constitutes a concrete contribution to the early start of negotiations. We hope that we
will be able to tum the momentum provided by these recent developments into concrete
progress in the CD, positively influencing other fora as well.

In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I would like to emphasize that all States Parties must put
forward their utmost efforts to demonstrate genuine commitment towards seeking common
ground, which is essential for the successful outcome of this Review Conference. If we act as
if we can make a difference, it is our belief that we will indeed accomplish what we have set
out to do. The Republic of Korea stands ready to work with all the parties towards the goal
of strengthening the NPT regime.

Thank you.

/END/

5

