
Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations Office and
Other International Organizations
in Geneva

Unofficial translation
Check against delivery

STATEMENT
by the Delegation of the Russian Federation
at the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty Review Conference
Cluster I (nuclear disarmament)

Geneva, April 2013

Mr. Chairman,
Saving the world from the threat of WMDs, including nuclear weapons, is
justifiably considered one of the most important factors of ensuring international
security. We regard the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) as one of the major instruments for achieving this goal. In over 40 years of
its existence this international legal document has proved to be indispensable and
of unique value for the promotion of nuclear disarmament based on the respect for
equal and undiminished security for all and the promotion of nuclear nonproliferation, as well as free access of States to "peaceful atom".
It was the NPT with the obligations under Article VI that became a major

driver of progress achieved over the last decades in the area of limitation and
reduction of nuclear weapons. Allow me to remind you of the most prominent
achievements that have been made so far.
The first step towards real nuclear disarmament was the conclusion of the
US-USSR Treaty on the Elimination of the Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range
Missiles (hereinafter the 'INF Treaty') signed on 8 December, 1987. The INF
Treaty made it possible to eliminate the whole class of nuclear-missile weapons.
Pursuant to its provisions, 1,846 ground-launched intermediate-range (1,000-5,500
km) and shorter-range (500-1,000 km) ballistic and cruise missiles and 825

launchers of such missiles were completely eliminated. On the whole over 3,000
nuclear re-entry vehicles of total capacity of over 500,000 kt were deactivated. The
Treaty remains in force and is still an important factor of maintaining international
security and strategic stability.
As a follow-up to the INF Treaty Russia proposed to make the Treaty
universal and come to a legally binding arrangement on complete elimination of
such weapons. We believe that the implementation of such an initiative would give
a new impetus to ensuring global and regional stability, including in regions where
the military and political situation is complicated. We are ready for further detailed
dialogue on this issue with all the parties interested.

The signing of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (hereinafter - START) on 31 July 1991 and its entry into force on
5 December 1994 played a historic role in the process of coordinated and
verifiable reductions of strategic Russia and the US offensive arms.
According to the START Treaty, the Russian Federation was to reduce the
number of strategic nuclear delivery vehicles to 1,600 units and the number of
accountable warheads to 6,000 units. These obligations have been fully met ahead
of schedule. As of the deadline date of 5 December, 2001, the total number of
deployed strategic arms (inter-continental ballistic missiles, submarine-launched
ballistic missiles and heavy bombers) and accountable warheads had been cut to
1,136 and to 5,518 units respectively
Not only the US and Russia, but also Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine were
parties to the START Treaty. The historic role of the Treaty would have been
incomplete without Minsk, Astana and Kiev making significant efforts for its
implementation or without them totally fulfilling their obligations under the 1992
Lisbon Protocol. The responsible choice that Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine
made in favor of a coordinated withdrawal of nuclear weapons from their
territories and acceding to the NPT as non-nuclear States improved their security
and positively influenced the strategic stability in general. On 4 December, 2009,
in their joint statement the Presidents of Russia and the US confirmed the security
assurances for Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine set forth in the Budapest
Memorandums of 5 December, 1994.
The Moscow Treaty on the Strategic Offensive Reductions, signed by
Russia and the US in 2002, was another contribution made by Russia to nuclear
disarmament. In accordance with its provisions, the US and Russia undertook to
reduce by 31 December of 2012 the limits of their strategic nuclear warheads to
1,700-2,200 units, i.e. approximately to one third of the aggregate limit provided
for in START. These obligations have been fulfilled.
Along with strategic nuclear weapons the Russian Federation has reduced by
% the number of its non-strategic nuclear weapons. Today, the non-strategic

nuclear potential of Russia does not exceed 25% of that the USSR had in 1991. At
the same time, all Russia's non-strategic nuclear weapons were undeployed; they
are located exclusively within the national territory, and are stored in centralized
highly secure storage facilities.
We have repeatedly called on other countries possessmg non-strategic
nuclear weapons to follow the example of the Russian Federation and transfer
those weapons to their territories, eliminate all infrastructures that allows their
prompt deployment abroad and cease preparations for their use with engagement of
the military from non-nuclear States. We are convinced that such steps would
promote strengthening of international security and stability. We have to state that
our calls still remain unanswered.
The signature, on April 8, 2010, in Prague, of the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Russian Federation on Measures for the Further
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms was a remarkable event in
the field of nuclear disarmament. The provisions of the New Treaty specify that
each of the Parties shall reduce and limit its SOA, so that seven years after its entry
into force and thereafter, the aggregate numbers do not exceed:
- 700, for deployed inter-continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarinelaunched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), and heavy bombers;
- 1,550, for warheads thereof;
- 800, for deployed and non-deployed launchers of ICBMs and SLBMs, as
well as heavy bombers.
Thus, Russia and the US demonstrated once again their aspiration to achieve
large-scale reductions of SOA. The Parties agreed to cut the aggregate number of
warheads threefold (the ceiling under SORT was 2,200 warheads) and the
aggregate limit of strategic delivery vehicles by half (the ceiling under the old
START was 1,600 delivery vehicles, and SORT did not limit the delivery
vehicles).
At present, Russia and the US are gradually working on the implementation
of the Treaty. The inspections activities are underway. The intense exchange of

notifications is in progress. The implementation of the New START, full
implementation of its principles, norms and understandings make today the basic
priority in the area of reduction and limitation of nuclear armaments.
It is obvious that creating a favorable atmosphere to continue efforts on the

disarmament track is the task that lies on all States possessing nuclear weapons
without exception, and not only on Russia and the US. The achievement of the
goal of general and complete elimination of nuclear weapons will remam
problematic ifit is limited only to those States that are members ofPS.
Russia treats responsibly its obligations under Article VI of the NPT. At the
same time we are confident that nuclear disarmament should be a step-by-step
process with the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament. It would be
counter-productive to limit the process of nuclear disarmament by some
timeframes. The goal can be achieved only with a comprehensive approach while
preserving strategic stability, complying with the principle of equal and
undiminished security for all and ensuring, inter alia, the following international
conditions:
- adhesion of all States possessing nuclear potential to the process of nuclear
disarmament;
- prevention of placement of weapons in outer space;
- provision of guarantees of absence of recoverable nuclear potential in the
States;
- refusal from unilateral development of strategic missile defense systems
which is fraught with erosion of strategic stability and deregulation of the regime
of checks and balances that ensure the global parity;
- elimination of quantitative and qualitative imbalances in conventional
weapons alongside with resolution of other international problems, including the
settlement of regional conflicts;
- entry into force of the Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty;
- reliable viability of key multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation
tools.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia informs on a regular basis the world community on the steps it
undertakes in the area of reduction and limitation of nuclear weapons, including
within the framework of the NPT review process, Conference on Disarmament and
other international platforms.

Mr. Chairman,
Russia fully acknowledges its special responsibility for the fulfillment of
obligations under Article VI of NPT. Our country will continue to exert every
possible effort to solve the historic task of building a stable and safe world that
would be free from nuclear weapons.

