
Nuclear disarmament along with nuclear non-proliferation and peaceful
use of nuclear energy is one of the three pillars and main elements of the NPT.
The Russian Federation does its utmost to fulfill its relevant obligations under
the Treaty. This can be proved by the significant results we have achieved. In
particular, the nuclear arms race was not only stopped in accordance with
Article VI of the NPT, but also reversed long ago. The Russian nuclear arsenal
was reduced to its level of the late 50s - early 60s, i.e. before the full-scale arms
race.
The real reduction of nuclear weapons began on December 8, 1987 after
signing the US-USSR Treaty on the Elimination of the Intermediate-Range and
Shorter-Range Missiles. In accordance with this Treaty, two classes of nuclear
weapons were irreversibly eliminated, 1,846 ground-launched ballistic and
cruise missiles and 825 launchers of such missiles were fully destroyed within
the shortest possible period of time. In all, over 3,000 nuclear warheads with a
total yield of over 500,000 kilotons have been deactivated. This was followed
by the Treaty on Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, the
2002 Moscow Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions and, finally, the 2010
Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms.
In pursuance of these agreements, the Russian Federation reduced its
strategic offensive arms fivefold in the past 20 years. Only 20% of those
arsenals that we had at the peak of the cold war is left. Besides, we reduced our
tactical nuclear weapons arsenals fourfold.
Let us present some more up-to-date figures reflecting the dynamics of
nuclear arsenals reduction in the past ten years in relation to the NPT Review
Conferences. When the Seventh Review Conference convened in 2005 we had
4, 732 deployed warheads. By the Eighth Review Conference l:ield five years
later this figure shrunk to 3,900 deployed warheads. Now, there are 1,582

3

deployed warheads left, i.e. the number of deployed warheads in the last decade
was cut threefold. The number of reduced deployed delivery vehicles is
impressive as well: at the Eighth Review Conference held in 2010, we reported
to have had 800 units whereas now we have only 515 units left.
In this context, it is quite strange to sometimes hear the claims that
nothing is allegedly being done in the area of nuclear disarmament or that it is
in almost complete stagnation. Such claims, frankly speaking, bear no relation
to the truth and apparently can be explained either by lack of information of by
a polemic fervor, when objective assessments are replaced by emotions.
The nuclear arsenals reduction under the New START Treaty of 2010
still continues. By February 5, 2018, the Russian Federation and the United
States will have to reduce their respective numbers of delivery vehicles and
warheads to the stipulated levels.
Naturally, the question arises: what is next? It cannot be answered now,
first and foremost due to the current uncertainty in the international arena. In the
framework of the NPT, its States Parties repeatedly confirmed that the nuclear
disarmament should be carried out under conditions of strategic stability and
equal security for all. However, the situation here is deteriorating. Negative
factors that affect strategic stability are gaining strength.
This is related mainly to the unilateral implementation of the global ABM
system plans which, in current conditions, is an attempt to secure a military
advantage at the expense and to the detriment of other States. The Prompt
Global Strike program and the failure to develop arrangements to prevent the
deployment of weapons in outer space have an extremely negative impact. The
fact that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has not come into force
since its conclusion almost 20 years ago also affects modem international
relations. By the way, the Russian Federation ratified this Treaty in 2000.
Grave imbalances in conventional weapons in the European continent do
not facilitate further steps in the nuclear missiles field as well. The Treaty on

4

Conventional Armed Forces in Europe concluded in 1990 has become history,
and a possible new agreement that could replace it and correspond to new
realities is still just an intention. The negotiations on this agreement have not
even started.
During his speech in front of the participants of Valdai Forum in Sochi in
October 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin underscored our commitment
to nuclear disarmament. We expect that this objective will be treated seriously
and without any double standards. It means we should take into consideration
all factors that influence strategic stability and create necessary conditions for
further advance in this direction.
It must be taken into account that, with the conclusion of the New
START Treaty in 2010, our country has virtually exhausted the possibilities to
reduce our nuclear arsenal on a bilateral basis with the USA. Further steps in
this direction can only be made with the involvement of all states possessing
military nuclear capabilities.
We share the goal to ultimately achieve the global "nuclear zero". But the
question arises of how a relevant agreement should be formalized over time. In
this context, the need to develop a nuclear weapons convention is usually
mentioned. However, there is also an alternative, which is particularly
appropriate to recall here, at the NPT Review Conference. In accordance with
the penultimate paragraph of the Preamble and with Article VI of the Treaty, the
total elimination of nuclear arsenals should take place in compliance with the
Treaty on General and Complete Disarmament. These provisions were
somehow almost forgotten in the last decades, but they are actually an
international obligation for all the States Parties to the NPT. There is something
to think about.
Madam President,
We would like to emphasize that Russia regards with great attention and
respect the efforts of States to ensure rapid progress in nuclear disarmament and

5

to eliminate the danger of a nuclear war. We take multidimensional concrete
steps in this direction, which are appropriate to recall when considering the
disarmament provisions of the NPT. For example, all the tactical nuclear
weapons in Russia remaining after a fourfold reduction were transferred into the
non-deployed category. We have thus actually implemented the measures to dealert such weapons on an unprecedented scale. They are located exclusively
within the national territory and concentrated at centralized storage bases, where
a high-level security regime is assured, preventing theft or any unauthorized
use.
In addition, the Russian Federation does not deploy nuclear weapons
outside its national territory and does not transfer control of its nuclear weapons
to other states directly or indirectly.
We believe that the removal of non-strategic nuclear weapons by other
countries to their territories, the elimination of all infrastructure abroad
providing for the rapid deployment of non-strategic nuclear weapons and the
completion of preparation for their use with the involvement of non-nuclear
states would contribute to strengthening international security and further
reducing and limiting nuclear arsenals.
The de-targeting of Russian nuclear weapons that have a so-called "zero
flight mission" can serve as another example of de-alerting.
During the UN General Assembly sessions and NPT event, considerable
attention 1s given to the decrease of the role and significance of nuclear
weapons m military doctrines of nuclear-weapon States. These appeals are
taken into account in the Russian military doctrine, according to which the
hypothetical possibility of the use of nuclear weapons is limited to two
exceptional cases: the use of weapons of mass destruction against Russia or its
allies and in case when the very existence of the State is under threat. In other
words, they are purely defensive provisions. Moreover, a new concept of "nonnuclear deterrence" appeared in the latest edition of the military doctrine, which

6

objectively means a further reduction of the role and significance of nuclear
weapons in Russian doctrinal directives.
In addition, we would like to recall that, about a quarter of a century ago,
Russia unilaterally imposed a voluntary moratorium on the production of fissile
material used for creating nuclear weapons, which fully remains in force.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our commitment to further work towards
the reduction of nuclear arsenals, certainly, taking into account the development
of strategic environment and the evolution of all factors affect strategic stability.
We believe that the dynamics of gradual nuclear disarmament should be in line
with the pace of construction of an effective system of global and regional
security, as well as with the increased mutual confidence between States. We
call on all the States Parties to the NPT to focus on solving these truly priority
tasks towards early achievement of the nuclear disarmament goals set by the
Treaty.
Thank you for your attention.

