SLOVENIA
Check against delivery!
STATEMENT
by H.E. Mr. Andrej Logar, ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Slovenia to the United Nations
at the CLUSTER DEBATE ON NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT of the
3RD MEETING OF PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR 2015 NPT REVIEW
CONFERENCE
(New York, 28 April–8 May 2014)
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Allow me first to align my statement with the statement of the European Union (EU),
delivered by the European Union Special Envoy for Non-proliferation and Disarmament,
Ambassador Jacek Bylica. I would like to highlight a few points on nuclear disarmament that
are important for Slovenia.
Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out in my statement during yesterday's general debate, Slovenia
continues to believe in the world free of nuclear weapons. We are convinced that this should
not be a distant ideal, but rather an attainable goal for the international community. Slovenia
also believes that the NPT should continue to serve as a central point of all international
activities in the context of nuclear disarmament. We are convinced that the states in
possession of nuclear weapons, whether States Parties to the NPT or not, are particularly
responsible for the continuity of the disarmament process and should assume a more active
role.
Slovenia commends the United States and the Russian Federation for continuing reducing
their stocks of nuclear weapons within the framework of the START Treaty. We encourage
them to continue with the implementation of the Treaty and to launch new talks on further
reductions. In this context, we warmly welcome the initiative of the US President Obama to
address the issue of further reductions of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons together with
the Russian Federation. In our view, this would truly contribute to nuclear disarmament.
Countries with military nuclear programs that are not States Parties to the NPT also share the
responsibility for nuclear disarmament and for the security and safety of our planet. Slovenia
urges them not only to accede to the NPT, but also to discontinue the production of fissile
materials and join other possessing states in their nuclear disarmament efforts aimed at final
and irreversible solutions.
Mr. Chairman, Slovenia is a staunch supporter of treaty-based disarmament and arms
control. We see the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) as a first new international legal
instrument to be negotiated in the field of nuclear disarmament. We regret that the Conference
on Disarmament has been blocked for almost twenty years and thus unable to start
negotiations on the FMCT. We see a new opportunity in the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts (GGE), which met for the first time in Geneva in March this year. We

hope that the final report produced by this group will serve as a basis for future negotiations
on the FMCT. We hope for a strong treaty with an effective verification system. We are
confident that the FMCT will complement the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT). Speaking of the CTBT, I would like to seize this opportunity to appeal once again to
all Annex II States to ratify the CTBT as soon as possible.
One of the reasons for prolonged multilateral negotiations in the field of nuclear disarmament
is the lack of strong and functional international disarmament machinery. This needs to be
fixed, and we welcome all initiatives to this end. Allow me to mention the United Nations
Disarmament Commission (UNDC), which concluded its annual proceedings last week, and
the Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva. Slovenia would like to appeal once again to
the members of the Conference on Disarmament to start the process of expansion of its
membership. The CD should be open to all states that are concerned with international peace
and security and interested in participating in disarmament negotiations. We are convinced
that new members will only enrich the Conference on Disarmament.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, allow me to conclude with a few words on the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons. Slovenia recognizes the importance of this initiative. We
attended the conferences held in Oslo, Norway, in March last year, and in Nayarit, Mexico,
last February. We are well aware of possible devastation and humanitarian catastrophe that
could be wrought by a nuclear detonation or proliferation, and we agree that the international
community should be better prepared for, and informed on, such circumstances.
Slovenia would like to reiterate that this process could be streamlined in the context of the
NPT review process and could lead us forward towards the elimination of nuclear weapons.
We believe that rhetoric on the immediate and categorical ban of nuclear weapons or weapons
linked to nuclear technology is not constructive and will not bring us any closer to nuclear
disarmament.
Mr. Chairman, we commend Austria for the initiative to hold the next conference on
humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons later this year, and plan to attend it.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

