Mr. Chairman,
This year marks the 40th anniversary of the adoption of the NPT at the UN

General Assembly and the 38 of its entry into force. Since then, the NPT has been functioning effectively as the cornerstone of the global peace and security by reducing the threat of nuclear weapons as it mutually reinforces the balance between nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. However, there is a widely shared perception among NNWS that nuclear disarmament has not proceeded as had been anticipated.
Mr. Chairman,
The first and foremost task for nuclear disarmament falls upon the shoulder of nuclear weapon states (NWS). In this regard, we recognize the significant progress made thus far in nuclear reductions unilaterally or bilaterally by the two most important nuclear powers. It was an important achievement for the US and Russia to agree to reduce the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons down to the level of 1700-2200 weapons by 2012 under the Moscow Treaty.
We welcome the ongoing bilateral discussions between the USA and Russia for a follow-up to the current Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) which expires in December 2009. We hope that the two countries continue to hold constructive dialogue while bearing full responsibility for their potential impacts on the international community as a whole. We see it essential to extend at least the key provisions of the Treaty. In this regard, as the UK Secretary of State for Defence, Mr. Des Browne mentioned in his speech at the Conference on Disarmament (CD) last February, "its success would provide a powerful signal that the post Cold War disarmament trend toward zero will continue".
The reaffirmation of their united support for the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty in the joint statement made by the U.S and Russia at the First Committee of UN General Assembly last October may be inscribed as another positive gesture toward nuclear disarmament. We also welcome the recent announcement by the UK and France of their unilateral nuclear reduction measures. This will make a significant contribution to the enhancement of the CBM as well by making public their nuclear reduction plans.
However, it must be reminded that any qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and the development of advanced new types are contrary to the obligation to work for nuclear disarmament in good faith. Furthermore, there still remain an estimated 27,000 nuclear weapons on hair-trigger alert around the globe and many NNWS cast a doubtful eye on the faithfulness of NWS in their implementation of article VI obligations.
In this regard, I would like to quote another important person from the UK, one of the five NWS. Former U.K Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett, herself quoting Kofi Annan in her speech delivered in Washington. D.C, on 25 June 2007, eloquently stated "that our efforts on non-proliferation will be desperately undermined if others believe - however unfairly - that the terms of grand bargain have changed, that nuclear weapon states have abandoned any commitment to disarmament." She clearly pointed out the importance of faithful implementation of nuclear disarmament in securing non-proliferation. It is in this context that my delegation has continuously called upon all NWS to implement Art VI obligation in good faith by observing the "Principles and objectives" of the 1995 Review & Extension conference and by carrying out the 13 practical steps of the 2000 Review conference.
As for the 13 practical steps, on the other hand, my delegation would like to draw the attention to the fact that there are measures among them which were rendered moot or inadequate to be implemented after ten years' lapse of time. My delegation believes that the Review process should review each steps and bring them up to date to reflect the newly changed international surroundings. By making this proposal, my delegation does not mean in any way to exonerate NWS from their obligation of implementation. On the contrary, it is a way to maintain the effectiveness of the decision of the 2000 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is another task waiting for our decisive action. The CTBT celebrated the 11th anniversary of its adoption last year. However, its entry into force seems more distant than ever, despite its undeniable benefits that it guarantees to bring about.
In this regard, the recent ratification of Colombia and Malaysia of the Treaty marks a significant step forward in reviving the momentum. While offering my delegation's heartfelt congratulation to Colombia and Malaysia, my delegation also would like to strongly call upon those States that have not yet ratified the Treaty, in particular those remaining nine Annex II States, to do so without further delay. We also stress the importance of maintaining moratorium on nuclear testing until the entry into force of the CTBT.
The negotiation of an FMCT is indeed the next logical step to the CTBT, not only for nuclear non-proliferation, but also for nuclear disarmament. My delegation believes that time is ripe for the commencement of negotiation on an FMCT in the CD. In this regard, my delegation welcomes and supports the Draft Decision by the President (CD/1840). We believe this proposal is a good compromise accommodating diverse views which have been expressed since the submission of LI proposal of 2007. My delegation calls upon all CD members to show more flexibility and political will for the adoption of the Draft Decision so that negotiation on an FMCT can begin at the earliest possible date. We also urge all relevant states to declare and observe a moratorium in the production of fissile materials for weapons use until an FMCT enters into force.
Mr. Chairman,
The 2010 Review Conference will be an occasion to find realistic and practical ways for nuclear disarmament and thereby revitalize the NPT as the cornerstone of the international peace and security by reflecting the evolution of the international situation for the past 10 years. My delegation sincerely hopes that this second NPT PrepCom meeting will provide us with another momentum to move one step closer to achieving the goal.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.