
Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Korea, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of this Committee. While we have daunting tasks before us, I am confident that they are not insuperable with your able and proven leadership. I would also like to assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation in the work of this Committee.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me begin by recalling the significant role and contributions made by this Committee five years ago. At that time we secured a historic decision to extend the NPT indefinitely, thereby strengthening momentum for our common aspirations for a nuclear-weapon-free world in the new millennium. My delegation regards the work of the Main Committee I as vital in seeking good solutions to core issues related to the strengthening of the global non-proliferation regime. We also have high expectations for the subsidiary body of this Committee, under the competent leadership of Ambassador Clive Pearson.
With this in mind, I would like to make some brief comments on relevant events since the 1995 Review and Extension Conference.
First of all, we are happy to note that we have made positive achievements in terms of NPT membership, the successful completion of CTBT negotiations, strengthened safeguards and nuclear-weapon-free zones (NWFZ).
At the same time, however, we are facing grave challenges to the non-proliferation regime, which we should address urgently and with determination. Nuclear tests by India and Pakistan in 1998 dealt a serious blow to global non-proliferation efforts. The CTBT, adopted with the blessing of the international community, has yet to enter into force, and with the failure of the US Senate to ratify the Treaty, prospects for its early entry into force remain elusive. The potential danger of missile proliferation coupled with weapons of mass destruction (WMD) capabilities also poses a new set of challenges to the NPT community. As the single multilateral negotiating body for disarmament, the Conference on Disarmament (CD) has been deadlocked for more than three years, thereby stalling negotiations on the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), which was called for in the 1995 Principles and Objectives (P&O).
Against this backdrop, we should assess where we stand today and decide what has to be done to promote the goals of non-proliferation and disarmament in the future.
Mr. Chairman,
There is no doubt that the NPT has been recognized globally as the international norm against nuclear proliferation. The NPT currently enjoys near universality, having assembled 187 members, and the adherence of 9 new members. Now, only four countries remain outside the NPT.
Yet the NPT is not complete without these four countries. NPT member states should address this issue squarely and articulate a collective view to preserve the integrity and credibility of the NPT and the global non-proliferation regime.
In this regard, my delegation firmly believes that the Review Conference, in pursuit of universality, should:
Call upon the four remaining countries to accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon states as soon as possible; 
Urge those countries not to transfer nuclear-weapons-related material, equipment or technology to other states, particularly to those suspected of having nuclear ambitions, 
Strongly urge those countries to put their facilities under the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system; and 
Make it clear that no special status, whether de jure or de facto, will be recognized for those countries. 
Mr. Chairman,
As we are well aware, NPT member states, both nuclear-weapon states (NWS) and non-nuclear-weapon states (NNWS), are obliged to comply fully with their treaty provisions, including commitments to non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. Nuclear disarmament is not just an essential element of the nonproliferation regime, but is also a binding obligation, as provided in Article VI of the NPT, and in accordance with the Principles and Objectives (P&O) decision of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference.
In this regard, we highly commend the recent constructive action of the Russian Federation in ratifying START II and CTBT. We sincerely hope that this initiative will provide significant momentum for further nuclear arms reduction negotiations among nuclear-weapon states in the not-too-distant future.
We encourage the trilateral initiative of the United States, Russia and the IAEA to put excess weapons materials under IAEA supervision. My delegation would like to stress that such initiatives should be complemented by the efforts of the other nuclear-weapon states.
It is time for nuclear-weapon states to redouble their efforts for nuclear disarmament in response to the call of the international community. While we support a practical, step-by-step approach, we share the view that the international community has legitimate concerns, and therefore should be able to discuss this important issue by exchanging information and views on endeavors for nuclear disarmament. To this end, we support proposals to establish an appropriate mechanism, such as an Ad Hoc Working Group in the CD.
Mr. Chairman,
It is truly commendable that we were able to realize one of the goals in the program of action for nuclear disarmament by adopting the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) in September 1996 as we agreed to do in the 1995 Principles and Objectives.
The current state of ratification and events, however, does not bode well for the Treaty's entry into force. Among the nuclear-weapon states, two states have not yet ratified the Treaty. Among the 44 states whose ratification is required for the Treaty's entry into force, three countries have not yet signed the Treaty.
In this respect, we strongly support the final declaration adopted at the first Conference on Facilitating the Entry Into Force of the CTBT, held in Vienna in October last year, to be implemented. My delegation believes that the Review Conference should update its objectives for the CTBT to facilitate the early entry into force of the Treaty. To this effect, the final declaration will provide sound guidance.
We welcome the recent approval of the CTBT by the Russian State Duma, which will greatly contribute to facilitating the early entry into force of the Treaty. For our part, the Korean Government signed the Treaty in September 1996 when the Treaty was open for signature, and ratified it in September 1999.
Pending the entry into force of the CTBT, it is essential that the five nuclear-weapon states maintain their moratoria on nuclear tests and that the three nuclear-capable states refrain from further tests.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me move on to another objective, set as part of the program of action for nuclear disarmament in the 1995 P&O: namely, FMCT negotiations. After the CTBT, the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, as laid out in the Principles and Objectives Decision, is another important step toward strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and eventually achieving nuclear disarmament.
It is regrettable that the CD has so far been unable to carry out effectively the role so unanimously accorded to it. It is therefore imperative for the Review Conference to urge the CD to re-establish an Ad Hoc Committee for FMCT negotiations immediately, so that the CD can fulfill its recognized role as the single multilateral negotiating forum for disarmament. For the negotiations to be effectively undertaken, my delegation firmly believes that the CD should come up with more creative ways to ensure continuity in our negotiations, instead of drawing up programs of work for ongoing negotiations every year.
Pending completion of the FMCT and its entry into force, my delegate strongly urges those nuclear-weapon states that have declared a moratorium on the further production of fissile materials for nuclear-weapons purposes to adhere to their commitment. We also urge all nuclear-weapon states and nuclear-capable countries to agree to such a moratorium.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reaffirm its strong support for the Principles and Objectives adopted in the 1995 Review and Extension Conference. Their basic direction for non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament remains valid and effective. We need therefore to build upon and further improve the P&O.
As my delegation emphasized at the Plenary, we should work together agree, at the very least, on a forward-looking document, which will contain a concrete plan of action This document could incorporate the unfulfilled tasks from the 1995 Principles and Objectives and updated expectations for 2000 and beyond. Given the importance of this document to the vitality of the NPT regime it is essential that States parties find consensus on a new course of action for the next five years
Thank you

