SOUTH AFRICA: NATIONAL STATEMENT FOR MAIN COMMITTEE I
NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT - REVIEW
Chairperson,
South Africa wishes to associate itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the New
Agenda Coalition.
Chairperson,
Whilst significant progress has been made in meeting the nuclear
non-proliferation obligations of the Treaty, the nuclear
disarmament pillar - as enshrined in Article VI and reaffirmed by
the subsequent unequivocal undertaking made by the nuclearweapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals - has yet to be realised.
While it may take time for nuclear disarmament to culminate in a
world free of nuclear weapons, we do have a body of consensus
measures on which progress could and should have been
registered since 2010. Progress has been lacking in a range of
areas, including reducing and eliminating nuclear weapons
stationed outside the territories of NWS. Similarly, NWS and their
allies continue to rely on nuclear weapons as integral to their
military and security doctrines. Furthermore, an estimated 1 800
nuclear warheads still remain on high-alert status.
South Africa welcomes the reductions in the global stockpile of
nuclear weapons. Reductions are indeed vital to removing the
excessive destructive capabilities developed during the Cold War,
but do not substitute for concrete, transparent, irreversible and
verifiable nuclear disarmament measures.

While reductions are essential , it is important to also note that the
current arsenal levels are being compared to Cold War levels.
While this may be accurate, it is firstly important to agree that the
current levels are still too high.
Secondly, the Cold War levels are testament to the fact that
effective measures are needed to advance disarmament in a
transparent, verifiable and importantly irreversible manner and why
this should not be left to States locked in a deterrence situation.
Article VI is a matter for all States.
The value of these reductions has regrettably been offset by the
development of new categories of nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, which provide a clear indication that some of
the nuclear-weapon States continue to harbour aspirations for the
indefinite retention of these instruments of destruction, contrary to
their legal obligations and commitments. When South Africa
agreed to the Treaty’s indefinite extension, we certainly did not
agree to the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons.
These modernisation efforts, far from being simply part of ongoing
maintenance programmes - as some States have argued - are
primarily designed to enhance performance. While there may
indeed be fewer nuclear weapons today, the ones that exist are
far more destructive and deadly than those they replaced. Such
developments, together with the billions allocated for this purpose
over several decades, amount to a de facto nuclear arms race,
which runs counter to Article VI. In a world where so many live in
abject poverty, it is unacceptable that vast resources are diverted
for this purpose.
Given this situation, South Africa recommends that this
Conference:

 Reaffirms the continued validity of the 1995 decision on
“Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament”, the practical steps agreed to in the Final
Document of the 2000 Review Conference and the
“Conclusions and Recommendations for follow-on actions” of
the 2010 Review Conference, and urges the nuclearweapon States to accelerate concrete progress on the
measures leading to nuclear disarmament through the
adoption of specific timelines and benchmarks.
Chairperson,
South Africa is pleased to form part of the humanitarian
consequences initiative which we believe serves to buttress the
very raison d'etre of the Treaty. We are pleased with the fact that
more than three-quarters of all countries are now supporting this
initiative and that this issue is now well established on the global
agenda. Rather than serving as a so-called distraction, these
Conferences are integral to advancing Action 1 agreed to in 2010.
The humanitarian conferences underscored the fact that the
catastrophic consequences of a nuclear weapon detonation,
whether by accident, miscalculation or design, is not confined to
space and time, and cannot be adequately addressed. In view of
security doctrines that continue to include circumstances in which
these weapons could be used, my delegation finds little comfort in
the "resolve to ensure that this occurrence never happens".
The growing risk cannot be obviated by simply avoiding a nuclear
war or the use of nuclear weapons, as some States maintain.
It is evident that the only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons
will never be used again is through their total elimination.

The realisation of Article VI is not the preserve of the few but the
Treaty obliges all States parties to the Treaty to pursue this
objective. It is a shared responsibility of all States to prevent any
use of nuclear weapons, to curb their proliferation and to achieve
nuclear disarmament.
South Africa has long advocated for the construction of a
multilateral, legally-binding agreement to fill this gap and has also
long supported a systematic and progressive approach to nuclear
disarmament, including through the establishment of a framework
agreement, comprising a set of mutually reinforcing instruments.
However, for this latter approach to be credible, it has to contain
clear timelines and benchmarks that meet the nuclear
disarmament principles of transparency, irreversibility and
verifiability, many of which have already been agreed but are yet
to be implemented.
The construction of such an agreement is in keeping with our
obligation to pursue negotiations in good faith on ‘effective
measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an
early date and to nuclear disarmament’, as envisaged under
Article VI. As a starting point, together with the NAC, we call on
this Review Conference to explore the legal approaches available
to advance these ‘effective measures’. We have heard those
States that advocate for a ‘practical’ and ‘realistic’ approach.
However, if all States are truly committed to the establishment
and maintenance of a nuclear-weapons free world, it is unclear
why they would be reluctant to engage in such a discussion.
 South Africa therefore expects that this Conference will at
least reaffirm the conclusions reached in the 2010 outcome
document on this matter, and that it will build on these in a
concrete manner taking into account the developments since

the 2010 Recvon, in particular ensuring that the findings of
these Conferences are adequately reflected in our follow-on
actions and decisions.
 We further recommend that the Review Conference stresses
that in light of the growing understanding of the risk posed by
nuclear weapons and their devastating humanitarian
consequences, there is an urgent need for the full
implementation of existing obligations under the NPT and its
Review Conferences.
 South Africa calls on the Conference, in its outcome
document, to recognise all contributions of States Parties
regarding effective measures relating to nuclear
disarmament in fulfilment of their obligations under Article VI
and to support a thorough further consideration of these
contributions and proposals.
 Most importantly, taking the catastrophic humanitarian
considerations as our compass and Article VI as our
collective mandate, we expect to see a process firmly and
irrevocably put in place to elaborate effective measures
leading to nuclear disarmament required by Article VI.
Chairperson,
The NPT cannot succeed if it focuses only on the security
interests of the few. Security concerns are important provided
that they serve to guarantee security for all the world’s peoples –
our collective security. The view that nuclear weapons assist in
‘guaranteeing their security and that of their allies’ amounts to
incitement to proliferate because it is simply not sustainable for
some States to argue that nuclear weapons are central to their
own security, while expecting others not to argue the same.

Similarly, it is unacceptable for some States to maintain that there
is a need to create the necessary conditions for nuclear
disarmament, when these conditions were in fact created when
these very States acceded to the NPT. Such arguments
contradict the obligations under Article I of the NPT. As the UN
Secretary General has correctly asserted, ‘there are no right
hands for wrong weapons’.
 Finally, South Africa therefore recommends that the
Conference again urges all States Parties to commit to
pursue policies and actions that are fully compatible with the
Treaty and the objective of achieving a world free of nuclear
weapons.
I thank you, Chairperson.

