
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to align with the declaration read by the Representative of the European Union on
behalf of the EU and of its Member States, which we fully support.
Spain would like to highlight the comprehensive relevance of each and every one of the three pillars
of the Treaty as well as the need for a balanced implementation of all three: The work in favour of
nuclear disarmament, the fight against proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. These
goals are accompanied by our firm commitment in favour of the universalization of the NPT as a
primordial element for its full realization.
Spain wishes to reaffirm its commitment to a vision of a world without nuclear weapons as the final
goal of this process, whose cornerstone is the NPT. With the adoption of the conclusions and
recommendations of the 2010 Review Conference, including its Action Plan, the international
community reaffirms its commitment to meeting this goal.
We share the opinion of other States regarding the need to carry out these measures at the
multilateral, bilateral and unilateral levels, by progressively constructing the road towards nuclear
disarmament through integrated blocks of initiatives as defended in the working document "Building
blocks for a world without nuclear weapons," which we co-sponsor.
Spain has followed closely the various international initiatives on nuclear disarmament in the past
few years and has participated in the Oslo and Nayarit Conferences on the humanitarian impact of
nuclear weapons. Likewise, aware of the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that the use of
nuclear weapons may have, Spain will continue to work in favour of nuclear disarmament in the
terms foreseen in the Treaty.
Therefore, we wish to reiterate our commitment with the processes of weapons control and nuclear
disarmament, especially through a general reduction of the world's existing nuclear weapons, in
accordance with Article VI of the NPT, taking into account the special responsibility of the States
that possess major stockpiles.
For Spain, the proposal presented by the President of the United States last June to reduce the
amount of strategic weapons by one-third is a positive step in this direction. For this reason, we
welcome the agreements reached between the Russian Federation and the United States on

strategic arms reduction. We hope the remaining States with nuclear stockpiles take the necessary
steps to move in this direction in a decisive manner.
We also wish to highlight the need to increase transparency around nuclear weapons, and we urge
the remaining nuclear-weapon possessing States to continue down this path.
In this regard, Spain would like to reiterate its appeal in the Disarmament Conference to launch the
negotiations of a Treaty on the Prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices. We consider this to be one of the crucial steps towards
meeting the obligations and the final goal enshrined in Article VI of the NPT.
Together with disarmament, the definitive end to nuclear explosions constitutes another primordial
goal in order to reduce the possibilities of an arms race and the risk of nuclear war. Therefore, we
reiterate our wish to put a total and irreversible end to all types of nuclear explosions through our
expression of support to the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. The
Treaty's objective is to reduce the risk of accidents derived from the experimental detonation of
nuclear devices, avoid environmental damages and limit the arms race.
I would like to recall the importance of the decision taken by Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan
in1992 of forgoing nuclear weapons that were inherited by the Soviet Union and to accede to the
NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. I would like also to highlight the relevance of the guarantees
as to territorial integrity and security offered thereafter to these States as important commitments
that cannot be overlooked. In this regard, the commitments made on the occasion of the 1994
Budapest Memorandum are especially important in order to consolidate the progress made in
matters of disarmament and non-proliferation.
In the face of this scenario, the world views with hope meetings like this one or the 2010 Review
Conference, as well as its Action Plan and other consensual decisions in order to move towards a
rigorous implementation of the NPT. This can be done through the adoption of concrete, effective,
pragmatic and consensual measures that intensify efforts in favour of disarmament.
Spain's commitment to fight for a world without nuclear threats takes us to negotiate within the
multilateral framework of the United Nations. We are convinced that this is the best way to obtain
real progress in this area, and this will serve as a reference point for future generations on the work
accomplished towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

