Joint Statement
by
H.E. Ambassador Nils Daag
on behalf of Mexico and Sweden
to the First Preparatory Committee for the Review Conference of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Vienna, 30 April-11 May 2012
Cluster One

Mr. Chair,
Firstly, allow me to join all those that have congratulated you on your assumption as
Chair for this first Session of the Preparatory Committee of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty in Vienna. You can rest assured of our delegations' support of your efforts in
guiding our work.
I speak on behalf of Mexico as well as of my own country, Sweden, in both our
countries' current capacities as Coordinators of the Article XIV process for the entry
into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. As such, we wish to
restate the significance of the CTBT for the NPT as well as for all global efforts to
uphold and strengthen nonproliferation and achieving nuclear disarmament, thereby
contributing to international and regional security.
Efforts by the international community to put in place a ban on nuclear testing are
closely interlinked to the NPT. As is known, the preamble of the NPT recalls "the
determination expressed ... to seek to achieve the discontinuance of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons for all ... ", already at this point reflecting the need to
expand the partial test ban treaty to include all nuclear test explosions, also under
ground.
Commitment to the realization of the CTBT was an integral part of the 1995
agreement by the States parties to the NPT allowing the indefinite extension of the
Treaty. The early entry into force of the CTBT was recognized at the 2000 Review
Conference of the NPT as a one of the 13 practical steps for achieving nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation objectives. This call has also been reaffirmed
repeatedly as being of central importance by the UN General Assembly, over the
years.
Some progress has been made lately towards the entry-into-force of the CTBT, most
recently through the ratification by Indonesia - the first Annex 2 State to ratify since
2008. We further welcome the recent ratifications of the Central African Republic,
Ghana, Guinea, Guatemala, Trinidad and Tobago and the signature of Niue. Efforts
by all remaining states in this regard, specially by those whose ratification is needed
for the Treaty to enter into force, are crucial and should be lauded. It is indeed to be
welcomed that the CTBT has achieved near universal adherence with signature by
183 States and ratification by 157 States as of today.

Nevertheless, entry-into-force of the CTBT remains an important outstanding issue
where further progress is urgently required. The Treaty is a core element of the
international non-proliferation and disarmament regime - raising the threshold for
the acquisition of nuclear weapons, preventing a qualitative arms race and reducing
the reliance on nuclear weapons in national security strategies. The entry into force
of the Treaty would also strengthen confidence in the international security system
through the establishment of an effective verification mechanism. In this regard, all
CTBT undertakings contained in the 2010 Action Plan should be duly fulfilled.
Mr. Chair,
On 23 September last year our respective Foreign ministers assumed the CoPresidency of the ih Article XIV Conference facilitating the entry into force of the
CTBT. Therefore, advocacy of the CTBT is of particular importance on our political
agendas, adding to our longstanding support for the Treaty. In a joint op-ed article
last December commending Indonesia's parliamentary endorsement of the CTBT, we
outlined some of our CTBT priorities and pledged to work for achieving further action
towards entry into force. Among other things, we have committed ourselves to
addressing the issue of the entry into force of the CTBT vigorously, including at high
pOlitical levels, making use of as many available opportunities as possible, be it in
bilateral, regional, or international settings.
Our countries have currently been active in different ways to advance this aim. For
instance, Mexico is the co-author of the Resolution on the CTBT presented annually
to the General Assembly, and has recently devoted itself to a global campaign on the
entry into force of the CTBT, working together with the NPDI.
Sweden, for its part, has primarily focused on a regional approach, currently
engaging with Indonesia and other Southeast Asian partners in promoting complete
adherence to the treaty by encouraging all remaining states in that region to conclude
their CTBT ratification processes.
We see strong potential benefits with the CTBT also regarding other efforts towards
regionally banning nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. A case in point is
the ongoing process of setting the stage for the international conference on the
establishment of a WMD free zone in the Middle East. In our minds, CTBT ratification
by remaining states in the prospective zonal area would constitute one of the most
crucial single confidence building actions possible.
In a global perspective action is of course required by all by remaining eight Annex 2
states.
In our view the present situation for the CTBT, albeit functioning as a strong political
imperative against testing, backed up by national test moratoria, cannot replace a
CTBT firmly in place under international law. As we see it, bringing the CTBT into
force would entail a security benefit for any individual country and even more so for
the international community as a whole. Collective security would be immensely
strengthened were this to happen, surely spilling over positively to other disarmament
and nonproliferation areas and beyond.

f

Mr. Chair
Nuclear testing undermines global security and cannot be accepted. The
international community has been firm in its response to the three countries that have
remained outside and have performed nuclear explosive tests since the CTST was
concluded. Any further nuclear test must be considered an anomaly, a breach
against a world order supported by a vast majority, an unwelcome residual of a time
we do not want to revisit.
Further progress on CTST adherence, in particular as regards ratifications by
remaining nuclear weapons states, would contribute significantly to a positive
outcome of the 2015 Review Conference of the NPT. The message is clear. Progress
on CTST will surely help lending progress to the NPT. We stand ready to contribute.
The NPT parties have already committed to achieving a world free of nuclear
weapons and, to that end, we need to make the world free of nuclear tests, paving
the way for a safer and better world.
Thank you for your attention.

