2018-04-19

Kort version (om <let allmanna inte maste kortas)
NPT Prep Com 2018 - Cluster 1 - Statement by Sweden
Mr Chair,
Sweden aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union
under this cluster, and would like to add the following national perspectives.
Against the background of a deeply worrying renaissance of nuclear weapons, it is
worth recalling that a nuclear weapon's free world is an overarching goal to which
we are all committed. From a Swedish perspective, current security challenges make
this task more urgent - not less. The catastrophic humanitarian consequences
associated with any use of these weapons are well documented and irrefutable .
These aspects constitute conditions that speak in favor of a realistic but ambitious
view on the nuclear disarmament that every delegation in this room has committed
to .
The NPT proper, together with the agreed final documents from 1995, 2000 and
2010, constitute the platfo1m we need for our efforts. Let us take guidance from
these documents, implement what has been agreed on and ensure a successful
outcome of the 2020 NPT Review Conference. We must aim to make progress in
all three pillars, including a re-affirmation of Article VI. In order to achieve this, we
need to look beyond what divides us and focus at the task at hand - finding
initiatives that unite.
A s a step towards finding, or creating, this common ground, risk reducing measures
could take us far. In the current security climate, the risk that nuclear weapons will
be used - by accident, miscalculation or design - is increasing. In light of this, we
see few things more urgent than the development of risk reduction agenda.
Sweden welcomes that the agreed limits of the New START were reached by the
deadline this February, and strongly encourages the US and Russia to reach an
agreement on further reductions beyond 2021. As part of such efforts, a reduction
of tactical nuclear weapons, a catego1y entirely outside existing agreements, would
be of particular importance . As for the INF, let me underline that its preservation is
a key European and global security interest.

Mr Chair,
Other measures that can and ought to be pursued include negative security
assurances. Non-nuclear weapon states have a legitimate interest (right?) in
receiving unequivocal and legally binding negative security assurances from nuclear
weapon possessing states, building on their unilateral statements in the context of
UN Security Council resolution 984 from 1995.
Another key issue is the entry into force of the CTBT. Sweden has a history of
deep political and technical support to the CTBT. The norm against testing already
established by this treaty is an achievement in itself. However, it cannot be taken
for granted. Nor can it ever be fully consolidated without a formal entry-into-force .
We reiterate our call on all States which have not yet done so, in particular those
listed in Annex 2, to sign and ratify the treaty.
The ongoing work in the High-Level Expert Preparato1-y Group is an encouraging
step towards a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty. Let us aim to follow up the work of
the expert group - in which Sweden is participating - by concrete action, including
the launch of actual negotiations.
Mr Chair,
A well-functioning multilateral disarmament machinery is key to make progress.
Some modest but potentially important steps have recently been taken in the CD .
Historically, actual negotiations of new legal instruments have often been preceded
by exploratory discussions. Let us hope that history repeats itself. The focus on
risk reduction in the just finalized UNDC-session is another welcome
development.
As has been reaffirmed by many delegations already, the NPT is the cornerstone
for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. Our priority must be to strengthen
the implementation of the treaty in order to uphold and preserve its role as a key
multilateral instrument for reinforcing international peace, security and stability.

