

Mr Chairman,
Numerous studies conducted in recent years have clearly shown that the use of nuclear weapons, whether
deliberate or not, would have unacceptable humanitarian consequences in virtually all conceivable
circumstances. It is thus difficult to imagine how the use of such weapons could be compatible with the
requirements of international law and, in particular, of international humanitarian law.
These findings are one of the reasons that explain why expectations surrounding nuclear disarmament are
high. They also underpin the launching of negotiations on a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons. Despite the
questions that may arise in connection with a negotiating process that is not supported by the whole of the
international community, Switzerland is convinced that a legal instrument rightly formulated can contribute to
achieving a world free of nuclear weapons. An essential condition for this objective to be met is that the ban
treaty reinforces the NPT and is complementary to that instrument. It should under no circumstances
compete with or weaken the NPT, but contribute to achieving the common objective to both instruments,
which is to realize a world without nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
The sustainability of the NPT nevertheless requires that all of its disarmament provisions be fully
implemented. The action plan that was adopted in 2010, like all of the commitments undertaken at the
Review Conferences of 1995 and 2000, is not a set of objectives that we must merely aspire – the value of
those documents depends on their resolute implementation.
The best way to demonstrate the effectiveness of the NPT in the area of nuclear disarmament is to make
more tangible progress in the implementation of the commitments undertaken. Any further delay in their
fulfilment can have only the opposite effect. The calling into question, by word or by deed, of commitments
entered into can only harm and weaken the treaty.
With this in mind, it is vital that during the current review cycle we focus on the 2010 action plan, that is, on
making progress on its implementation, which should be accelerated than has been the case in recent years.
As concerns that objective, it is our view that particular importance should be attached to the following
points:
Action 5 of the action plan is the principal measure guiding disarmament steps of a practical nature.
Significant progress in the implementation of those steps is needed, as this has largely been lacking thus far.
For example, there has been no progress since 2010 on diminishing the role of nuclear weapons in national
military doctrines, or on reducing stockpiles of non-strategic weapons. In this context, we can only call upon
the Nuclear Weapons States to move towards a rapid reduction of the entirety of their arsenals during the
present review cycle.
Still in connection with action 5, Switzerland has long devoted special attention to the subject of reducing the
operational readiness of nuclear weapons. This is an important and urgent interim measure on the path to
nuclear disarmament, for which there has been growing support in recent years. Switzerland fully supports
the statement on this matter delivered by Sweden on behalf of the De-Alerting Group.
The issue of lowering alert levels is part of the much larger question of reducing the risks posed by nuclear
weapons. Numerous studies have highlighted the fact that those risks have long been underestimated. In
addition, new risks have arisen as a result of various technological developments, such as the increasing
digitalization of command and control systems. The use of certain weapons systems such as nuclear-tipped
cruise missiles also raises a number of specific issues, due to the risks of misinterpretation or the lowering of
the threshold of the use of nuclear weapons. Overall, we can only call upon the Nuclear Weapons States to
make all necessary efforts to deal comprehensively with the risks inherent in the unintentional, unauthorised
or accidental use of nuclear weapons. Finally, it is our hope that those States will demonstrate greater
openness to engage in a dialogue on this subject.
The issue of transparency is another important subject. The submission of reports by the Nuclear Weapon
States in 2014 as required by the action plan represented an important step forward. It is essential that this
development not remain an isolated event, but that such reports be submitted on a regular basis. In addition,
progress is also needed to strengthen the coherence of the reports submitted and to ensure that they use
3

clearly defined parameters so that it is possible to assess the degree to which progress in disarmament has
been made. Furthermore, we would also like to recall action 20 of the 2010 action plan that the requirement
of providing regular reports applies to all States Parties, and not solely to the Nuclear Weapon States. In this
connection we take note of Working Papers 17 and 13, which have been submitted to this session of the
Preparatory Committee, and which include some interesting suggestions on avenues for further progress in
this area.
The last subject I would like to raise is that of verification. The fact that nuclear disarmament must be
verifiable is a cardinal principle, and an acquis of the NPT review cycle. In this regard we would like to
welcome the efforts that have been made towards developing improved verification capabilities. The
International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification, or IPNDV, is an important initiative in this
area. Another notable development is the Group of Governmental Experts established by the UNGA, which
is scheduled to meet for the first time next year. In this context, providing some space to this theme in the
current review cycle would be welcome.
Thank you.

4

