Seul le texte prononcé fait foi

Mr. Chairman,
Since its entry into force 42 years ago, the NPT has in large part delivered what was expected from
this regime in terms of non-proliferation. In sharp contrast, its achievements regarding nuclear
disarmament are far less comforting. Two decades after the end of the Cold War, nuclear deterrence
remains the underlying principle of security doctrines and thousands of nuclear weapons are still ready
for launch within minutes.
For a very long period, the disarmament pillar of the NPT did not receive the level of attention it
requires. This changed in 2000 with the adoption of significant provisions regarding nuclear
disarmament. Unfortunately, these were in large part ignored and not implemented.
In this context, the Action Plan adopted at the 2010 Review Conference is of particular importance.
Even if undertakings agreed upon remain modest, it provides us with a tool to start addressing the
deficit of the NPT’s disarmament pillar. It is a baseline to assess progress made towards nuclear
disarmament. But, as with previous NPT commitments, its ultimate success will depend on the degree
of implementation.
Mr. Chairman,
If we take stock of progress made since 2010, the result is mixed at best, underlining the need for
more dedicated and systematic action in the remaining time until the 2015 Review Conference.
Action 4 for instance has been partly fulfilled with the entry into force in February 2011 of the New
START treaty. But follow-on negotiations are now required.
Concerning Action 5, which is central to reduction efforts, we can hardly see any progress. There are
no signs that further reductions in the global stockpile of nuclear weapons will be negotiated any time
soon. On the contrary, one nuclear-weapon State seems to be in the process of increasing its nuclear
arsenal and all nuclear-weapon States are in the process of modernizing their nuclear forces. In
addition, no steps have been taken to deal with both non-deployed and non-strategic nuclear weapons
which are still not addressed by any international agreement. In this regard, we hope that NATO will
not miss the opportunity to open a door for future progress at its forthcoming Summit.
We remain also concerned that there is no progress on the reduction of the role of nuclear weapons in
security doctrines. It would be particularly important to lower the operational status of nuclear
weapons. Switzerland remains hopeful that NWS will be in a position to take steps to significantly
lengthen the decision-making process for the launch of any nuclear weapon.
Progress is also non-existent with regard to banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons, which relates to Action 15. This is due to the continuing stalemate at the CD which also
affects the implementation of Actions 6 on nuclear disarmament and 7 on negative security
assurances. If the impasse at the CD cannot be overcome, options must be explored for revitalizing
the disarmament machinery, as called for by UNGA resolution 66/66.

4

Some progress was made regarding the consolidation of existing nuclear-weapon- free zones. We
encourage the NWS to continue their efforts to ensure swift ratification of the protocols to these zones.
We also call upon them to review their reservations related to negative security assurances in this
context.
Concerning Action 10 and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), we welcome the recent
ratifications this year by Indonesia and Guatemala. However this step has still not been taken by eight
states listed in Annex II to the Treaty, including two nuclear-weapon States. In this context, we take
note of the compelling case for prompt ratification made by the report recently released by the US
National Academy of Science, which confirms among other things that compliance with the CTBT is
effectively verifiable and that warheads can be maintained without further testing.
The Action Plan contains several measures on the promotion of transparency in nuclear disarmament
and makes it clear that reporting is seen by the NPT community as a key commitment. Various efforts,
including joint efforts by the NWS, are under way and we expect significant progress not least
because transparency is necessary to assess the overall implementation of the Action Plan.
Mr. Chairman,
Greater efforts are necessary if the various measures of the action plan are to be fulfilled by 2015.
Nuclear-weapon States bear special responsibility in this respect. But all States parties have their part
to play. This applies especially to addressing the impasse affecting the multilateral disarmament
machinery.
This review cycle also provides us with the opportunity to further address key principles of the 2010
Outcome Document. In this document, NPT States parties voiced their deep concern at the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and reaffirmed the need for
all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international humanitarian
law. This brings the humanitarian aspect to the heart of nuclear disarmament and we believe that due
attention should be given to this new dimension. Its implications and the ways to secure the
implementation of this commitment should be further explored during the present review process. With
this aim in mind, Switzerland, together with Norway, will hold a side-event on 7 May on the impact that
a limited nuclear exchange would have on food security.

I thank you for your attention.

5

