Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN VIENNA
48 COTTAGEGASSE 1180 VIENNA
TEL (431) 478 3335 • FAX (431) 478 2907

Statement by
Ms. Morakot Sriswasdi,
Deputy Director-General of
Department of International Organizations,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Thailand,

at Cluster 1: Nuclear Disarmament,
the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

4 May 2017, Vienna

Mr. Chair,
1. At the outset, Thailand would like to align itself with the statement delivered
by the distinguished delegate of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Mr. Chair,
2. The Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation and disarmament of nuclear
weapons efforts. Thailand recognizes the concrete outcome of the NPT
during the past 50 years in establishing the global non-proliferation regime
and ensuring that States can harness nuclear technologies for peaceful use.
However, much work remains on nuclear disarmament.
3. As long as nuclear weapons exist, there is collective insecurity from the risk
of accidental, mistaken, unauthorized or intentional nuclear weapon
detonation, exposing humanity and the environment to their catastrophic
effects. It is, therefore, the common interest and the shared responsibility of
all NPT States Parties to fully implement all of the Treaty articles in a
balanced manner.
4. Thailand shares the view of the majority of States Parties that the NPT itself
calls for each of the Parties to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to nuclear disarmament, as required by Article 6 of the
treaty. This is more recently confirmed by the 1996 ICJ advisory opinion
that there “exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control”.
5. It is quite clear that the responsibility, commitment and actions in good faith
rest with all NPT State Parties. Thailand, therefore, fully supports the
international effort to negotiate legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear
weapons. We see this effort as strengthening the object and purpose of the
NPT in achieving the cessation of nuclear arms and towards nuclear
disarmament. This instrument, once concluded, will further strengthen the
international norms against nuclear weapons, and will provide the
groundwork towards a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention in the
future. For these reasons, the Prohibition Treaty and The NPT are not rivals.
Thailand encourages all stakeholders, including nuclear weapon States and
other nuclear armed States to constructively participate in the negotiation.

5. Thailand also recognizes other efforts in this regard including the discussion
towards the prohibition of the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons and other explosive devices, marked by the informal meeting of the
high-level fissile material cut-off treaty expert preparatory group in March.
Mr. Chair,
6. As the depositary of the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWFZ) or the Bangkok Treaty, Thailand supports the establishment of
regional nuclear-weapon-free zones, currently spanning over 100 countries,
in line with Article 7 of the NPT. These zones also reinforce the political
commitment of Member States not to develop nuclear weapons and help build
trust and confidence among countries in and across their respective regions.
These zones also provide the forum to engage Nuclear Weapon States in
ensuring security assurances for Non-Nuclear Weapon States. We also
encourage a more interactive engagement among these existing Zones. In this
regard, Thailand supports the universal adherence of the NPT in the Middle
East and the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons, as
well as other weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Chair,
7. We are concerned at the heightened tension in the Korean Peninsula resulting
from nuclear arms and recent military activities. In this regard, we call for the
effective implementation of all relevant UNSC resolutions, and discourage
any further provocative and destabilizing actions in Northeast Asia. The
political situation we are currently witnessing today casts doubt whether
security can ever be guaranteed for all in a world with nuclear weapons. It
also calls into question the effectiveness of the nuclear deterrence doctrine
and policy in ensuring collective security.
8. Thailand believes that constructive engagement, dialogues, and confidence
building measures amongst all States can create a conducive environment for
lasting peace and security. The disarmament regime would progress a lot
more from stronger political will and commitment from Nuclear Weapon
States especially with regards to transparency as well as measures to eliminate
the risk of nuclear weapon detonation, based on agreed actions and
recommendations from previous Review Conferences.
9. In closing, Thailand would like to join others in reaffirming our commitment
to the obligations under the NPT and continue to dedicating itself to work
towards a nuclear-weapon-free world. It is our hope that 2017 PrepCom can
achieve a solid foundation for the 2020 Review Conference.
I thank you, Mr. Chair.
------------------------------

