Mr. Chairman,
With regard to the consideration of Cluster I issues, my delegation wishes to reaffirm the importance of implementing the provisions of the NPT relating to nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament, and international peace and security. Thailand strongly believes that all nuclear weapon states should do their utmost and act in good faith to advance the implementation of Article VI in the same spirit as the relevant provisions on nuclear non-proliferation of the Treaty. Thailand reiterates its support for the full implementation of the 13 practical steps as adopted at the 2000 Review Conference. We also support the establishment of a subsidiary body on nuclear disarmament to focus on the issue of fulfillment of the obligations under Article VT.
Mr. Chairman,
The developments concerning global nuclear disarmament over the past years have yielded mixed results. We are concerned by the lack of progress towards achieving the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Certainly, the non-entry into force of START II is a setback to the 13 practical steps. But in terms of bilateral initiatives, there appears to be some encouraging signs. We welcome the signing of the Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty, or the Moscow Treaty, between the United States and the Russian Federation on 24 May 2002. The Treaty is important in reducing the strategic arsenals of both sides to 1.700-2,200 warheads. However, more needs to be done on the part of nuclear weapon states, and my delegation strongly urges such states to apply the principles of irreversibility and transparency in their pursuit of nuclear disarmament and other related arms control and reduction measures.
While the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against non nuclear weapon states, other practical and complementary measures aimed at creating a climate of trust should also be undertaken in tandem. This is why my delegation supports the efforts for the conclusion of a universal, unconditional and legally binding instrument on security assurances within the context of the NPT as a matter of priority. Additionally, my delegation also wishes to highlight the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith, and to bring to a conclusion, the negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control.
It goes without saying that the Conference on Disarmament holds key to the advancement of global nuclear disarmament discourse. Thailand urges all concerned parties to exert its best efforts to achieve an early agreement on the Programme of Work so that the Conference can move forward with the consideration of other pressing issues at hand. In this regard, we reaffirm our support to the Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty as an essential and mutually reinforcing measure for the nuclear disarmament regime. We look forward to the immediate commencement of negotiations of this Treaty.
Thailand also emphasizes the need to start substantive work on the prevention of an arms race in outer space in accordance with General Assembly resolution 62/20. We believe that the abrogation of the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems has created new challenges for strategic stability as well as the prevention of an arms race in outer space. We also need to take into account how the implementation of a national missile defence system, despite its defensive nature, may have an impact on the overall strategic balance and our efforts towards nuclear disarmament. In fact, we view the proliferation of missile and delivery systems as equally worrying. Therefore, they should also be addressed within the context of the NPT.
Moreover, my delegation wishes to stress the importance of the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. In this regard, my delegation urges all states that have not signed or ratified the CTBT to do so without delay. As for Thailand, we are in the process of completing our internal process to ratify and expect to become a State Party to the CTBT in the near future. We would also like to emphasize the importance of the commitments of States Parties to the nuclear test moratorium.
Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of global nuclear non-proliferation is not a one-way street. Achieving this goal effectively would require the parallel commitments of all nuclear weapon states toward general and complete nuclear disarmament. While acknowledging that certain progress has been made, Thailand continues to call for renewed emphasis in this regard with a view to laying a solid groundwork for the 2010 Review Conference.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.