Mr. Chairman
We have presented our views on the NPT in our general statement on Monday. Today, I wish to take the opportunity to explain our position with regard to Cluster I issues.
We have already highlighted the importance that we attribute to the inter-linkage among the three pillars of the NPT regime. Here, reiterating that the issues of non-proliferation, disarmament and peace and security ought to be handled with a holistic approach, we should like to elaborate on how we could work towards achieving Article VI goals.
The approach should be gradual and realistic, comprising of incremental and complementary practical steps. We do not have to re-invent the wheel; we may start by building on previous accomplishments of the NPT process.
In this context, my delegation has little to add to the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" of 1995, and to the "Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference, particularly to the "13 Practical Steps" therein.
I should like to express our views on some of those steps.
During the Cold War, nuclear forces used to play a predominant role in security and defence policies of nuclear weapon states. Nuclear targeting plans could have been executed at short notice. High readiness levels with quick-reaction alert postures were the daily practice. Significant changes occurred since then. I believe that we have made considerable progress over the past decade. We can build on that.
On that account, let me state that Turkey appreciates the positive steps taken by the NPT nuclear powers towards nuclear force reductions. We insist that this momentum ought to be preserved and the declining role attributed to nuclear weapons should be maintained.
No single step can suffice in our global efforts for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We hold the view that this endeavour consists of building blocks. The early entry into force of the CTBT will be a vital building block. Turkey signed this important
Treaty as soon as it was opened to signature in 1996, and in its capacity as one of the countries whose ratification is required (Annex II countries) for entry into force, ratification process was completed in 2000.
We are heartened to see that, the CTBT has been ratified by 35 out of the 44 "Annex II" countries. We have been actively participating in Article XIV Conferences. In addition, Turkey has also assumed another responsibility within the verification system. We host one of the 50 primary seismic stations of the "International Monitoring System". This is among the already certified 37 stations. We shall continue to advocate for the early entry into force of the CTBT, which we see as instrumental in restraining vertical proliferation.
Therefore, we call upon all states that have not yet signed and ratified the Treaty, to do so; in particular, the states whose ratification is required for its entry into force. Pending that, all states should continue to abide by a moratorium and refrain from any action, which would be contrary to the provisions of the CTBT.
Last but not least, much responsibility rests with the CD. After a decade of impasse in this unique multilateral forum for disarmament, we believe that time is ripe for revitalization. During the Presidency of Turkey a compromise package contained in document CD/1840 has been submitted on behalf of the six Presidents of the CD in 2008. We hold the view that members of the CD may wish to take this opportunity by commencing negotiations on FMCT, and can bring up any issue they may deem relevant. The CD may eventually take new initiatives in other areas, including, further progress on nuclear weapon free zones, supplementary measures to assure non-nuclear States Parties to the NPT against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and prevention of an arms race in outer space.
Such steps would be complementary means within the toolbox, and are not mutually exclusive. All we need is to revitalize the spirit of 1995 and 2000.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.