STATEMENT BY TURKEY

at
the Ist Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster I debate
(5 May 2017, Vienna)

0

Mr Chairman,
Turkey regards the NPT as the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and the
essential foundation of the pursuit of nuclear disarmament.
Turkey remains fully committed to its objectives and provisions with its three pillars, its
further strengthening and universalization.
We once would like to reiterate our call to those outside the NPT to accede to the Treaty
without conditions as non-nuclear-weapon States.
We are convinced that the achievement of the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear
weapons depends first and foremost to the successful and universal implementation of the
NPT regime. While we acknowledge frustration especially regarding pace of progress on
nuclear disarmament, we are also convinced that the NPT has proven its use and success.
At the beginning of a new review cycle, we should identify areas where we can all work
together as nuclear weapon and non-nuclear weapon states.
Our work obviously does not start from scratch. The 1995 Review and Extension Conference
and the 2010 Action Plan identified the main goals in three pillars.
Like the previous review cycle, Turkey will continue with its Non Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) partners, to promote the implementation of consensus
outcomes of the 2010 Action Plan. Working papers have been submitted on issues including
on transparency, FMCT and disarmament education.
Mr Chairman,
The undesirable shortcomings demonstrate the realm of nuclear disarmament is by no means
disconnected from the real world. It is inherently linked to existing tensions among actors,
divergent threat perceptions and interplay among scores of different dynamics. The prevailing
international security environment must be taken into account.
No single step can suffice in our global efforts for nuclear disarmament. Our approach is
focused on incremental steps that deliver concrete results contributing to disarmament.
Constructive engagement of all relevant parties is a must to achieve complete elimination of
nuclear weapons. Progress in multilateral nuclear disarmament also requires the promotion of
practical and effective confidence building measures. Turkey, together with a group of
countries, has submitted suggestions from the perspective of progressive approach.
Turkey supports systematic, progressive, verifiable and irreversible nuclear disarmament and
encourages all states that possess nuclear weapons to take further steps in accordance with
Article 6. In this regard, we hope the United States and the Russian Federation will continue
their efforts in order to achieve further reductions in their nuclear arsenals.

1

Last years have witnessed sharpened differences of opinion. On our part, we will continue
working towards the implementation of the 2010 NPT Action Plan. It is crucial that the NPT
and current NPT Review Cycle not be undermined by efforts undertaken elsewhere.
Mr Chairman,
The cessation of all nuclear weapon tests constitutes an important step towards both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. In this regard, I would like to stress the centrality of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).We call upon all States to uphold and maintain
moratoria on nuclear weapon test explosions and any other nuclear explosions. Despite all the
progress achieved at the political and technical levels, we regret the fact that twenty years
after its opening for signature, it has yet to enter into force.
We once again encourage all States, in particular to the remaining Annex II States whose
ratifications are required for the entry into force of the Treaty, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible.
Another essential step will be the commencement of negotiations on a non-discriminatory,
multilateral and verifiable treaty to ban the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices at the Conference on Disarmament (CD) on the basis of
the document CD /1299 and the mandate contained therein. This will again serve both
disarmament and non-proliferation purposes. In this context, we welcome the establishment
of the High Level Expert Preparatory Group whose mandate is to make recommendations on
substantial elements for a future treaty, without prejudice to national positions in future
negotiations.
Although the CD could not negotiate a treaty for the past two decades, it remains the single
multilateral negotiating forum. (The CD needs to be revitalized so that it can assume
substantive work and start negotiating as it has been mandated. We welcome all efforts to
bring the CD back to work. It is Turkey’s firm conviction that the CD has the mandate,
membership and the rules of procedures to discharge its functions.)
Turkey also supported the UN General Assembly resolution on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification and welcomes the establishment of the Group of Experts. We deem multilateral
nuclear verification capabilities necessary for realization and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons. It is with this understanding Turkey participates in the International Panel
on Verification of Nuclear Disarmament (IPNDV).
The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived
at among States of the regions concerned is an important non-proliferation and disarmament
measure.
A pending critical commitment of the 1995 Review Conference is the convening of an
International Conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
and all other weapons of mass destruction. We deeply regret that the 2012 Middle East
Conference did not take place. Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the establishment
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems in the Middle East.
2

This commitment will continue to be a critical element of this review cycle. We call on all
relevant states to undertake a constructive approach and exert genuine effort. We should
avoid the disappointment of 2015 Review Conference.
Mr. Chairman,
Before I conclude, I would like to reaffirm the relevance of the NPT and the importance of
continued progress towards achieving its key objectives. Turkey will be forward-looking,
constructive and focusing on common ground to advance our shared goal of a world without
nuclear weapons.
Thank you.

3

