THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND

CLUSTER 1 ISSUES STATEMENT
to the

THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS
By

Dr. Matthew Rowland
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the
Conference on Disarmament
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations in Geneva

New York, 2 May 2014
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr. Chairman,

1. The United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made on behalf of
the European Union. I would now like to add some further remarks in a national
capacity.

2. The United Kingdom remains fully committed to a world without nuclear weapons
and we firmly believe that the best way to achieve this goal is through gradual
disarmament negotiated using a step by step approach and within the framework of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

3. The United Kingdom understands the frustration expressed by those wanting to see
faster and further progress towards a world without nuclear weapons. However,
there are unfortunately no quick fixes to achieve nuclear disarmament. It requires
incremental and sustained increases in trust and transparency between nuclear
weapon states, and we continue to work diligently towards this end through the P5
process, most recently at the conference in Beijing in April. The sometimes differing
views of the P5 Nuclear Weapon States makes this process challenging, but all the
more valuable, which is why the UK has offered to host the next P5 Conference in
London in 2015, in the lead-up to the RevCon.

4. We should also not forget how far we have come along the road of nuclear
disarmament since the height of the Cold War. Overall, the number of nuclear
warheads in the world now stands at around 17,000, including warheads in storage
awaiting dismantlement. This is down from a peak of well over 60,000 in the mid
1980s.

5. Our own record on unilateral nuclear disarmament is strong. We have steadily
reduced the size of our own nuclear forces by well over 50% since our Cold War
peak, and all of our air delivered nuclear weapons have been withdrawn from
service and dismantled. The previously announced reductions in our nuclear forces

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

to no more than 120 operationally available warheads and a total stockpile of no
more than 180 warheads are continuing and will be completed by the mid 2020s. We
now have just one delivery system provided by four SSBN submarines and have
started the process to cut the maximum number of warheads onboard each
deployed submarine from 48 to 40, while reducing the number of operationally
available Trident missiles on each submarine to 8. These changes have already
been completed on at least one of the vessels.

6. The United Kingdom has undertaken ground-breaking research into the challenges
of verifying the dismantlement of nuclear warheads through the UK-Norway Initiative
(UKNI), the first such project jointly with a non nuclear weapon state. We are also
into the second decade of an active partnership with the United States on monitoring
and verification research. I’m glad that many of you were able to attend the side
events we organised yesterday to hear more about these initiatives.

Mr. Chairman
7. We also recognise that many delegations were disappointed that the United
Kingdom chose not to attend the recent conference on the humanitarian
consequences of the use of nuclear weapons in Mexico. The United Kingdom
continues to be deeply concerned at the humanitarian consequences which could
result from the use of nuclear weapons. That is why the United Kingdom continues
to do our utmost to prevent their use and remains steadfastly committed to the long
term goal of a world without nuclear weapons.

8. Much of the humanitarian consequences initiative has not, however, been focused
on the consequences of the use of nuclear weapons. It is focused instead on
asserting that nuclear weapons per se are inherently unacceptable, a view we do not
share. We consider that nuclear weapons have helped to guarantee our security,
and that of our allies, for decades. We want a world without them, but we need to

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

proceed to it carefully. The right political and security conditions for an outright ban
on nuclear weapons do not yet exist.

Mr. Chairman,
9. The United Kingdom supports the principle of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones, which
enhance regional and international security. We are therefore pleased to be signing
the Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia, and
once signed the United Kingdom will ratify the Protocol as soon as possible. We
hope that signature of this Protocol will encourage progress towards signature of the
Protocol to the South East Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone, and we remain ready to
work with South East Asian partners to resolve the outstanding issues.

10. In closing, Mr. Chairman, I would draw the attention of states parties to the more
detailed information we have provided in our national report pursuant to Actions 5,
20 and 21 of the 2010 NPT Review Conference Final Document. This demonstrates
our continuing commitment to nuclear disarmament and to all three pillars of the
NPT in an open and transparent way.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

