 Mr. Chairman,
Under the Charter of the United Nations the States have an obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
In accordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 255 (1968), the former Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States pledged immediate assistance to any non-nuclear-weapon State Party to the NPT, which was a "victim of an act or an object of a threat of aggression" in which nuclear weapons are used. Security assurances were also contained in unilateral statements made by the nuclear-weapon powers in connection with the 197S and 1982 Special Sessions of the UN General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
In 1995 the UN Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 984, which recognized the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT to receive assurances. The Security Council in this Resolution also took note the Statements made by the nuclear-weapon states, in which the conditions for the non-use of nuclear weapons were reiterated.
For years efforts have been made in various forums to develop formal security assurances that would be uniform, unconditional and legally binding. The UN General Assembly adopted several resolutions recommending the conclusion of an international convention on the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states. In our view, the referred legally binding international instrument should include:
-	obligation for states-possessors of nuclear weapons to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any non-nuclear state, to respect their sovereignty and existing borders:
-	obligation for states-possessors of nuclear weapons to refrain from political, economic and other forms of pressure on non-nuclear states in order to bring under their interests the sovereign rights of non-nuclear states;
-	obligation for providing assistance to the State that became a victim of an act of aggression or an object of threat of aggression with use of nuclear weapons:
-	provision that would stipulate the responsibility of a state-possessor of nuclear weapons tor violation of its obligations as well as established procedure to react on cases of impingement on sovereignty, rerritorial integrity and security of non-nuclear-weapon state wiih use of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,

At the same time we should recognize that problem of security assurances would exist until purposes of nuclear disarmament are reached. We should also take into account that some of the states that possess nuclear weapons remain outside global regime of nuclear non-proliferation.
Accordance of the credible security assurances in the form of an international legally binding instrument will substantially enhance the nuclear non-proliferation regime, improve mutual trust and overall stability. Reiterating our call upon all nuclear weapon states to acknowledge the value of negative security assurances and strictly adhere to their existing respective pledges, we can not but note the difference of views expressed by the delegations on the subject at this session of the Preparatory Committee.
In order to deeply discuss the security assurances issue with the purpose of finding acceptable solution the Ukrainian Delegation proposes to convene an International Conference under the auspices of the UN.
The Ukrainian delegation will be ready to further develop this initiative if it finds support from the delegations within this NPT review process.
Thank you.