STATEMENT by the Head of the delegation of Ukraine at the First session
of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Nuclear disarmament and security assurances (cluster 1)
Mr Chairman,
As it is the first time I am taking the floor, let me congratulate you
sincerely on your election as the Chair of the First session of the Preparatory
Committee. Ukraine hopes that under your skilful chairmanship this session
will lay a solid ground for progress towards a resultful 2020 NPT Review
Conference.
Mr Chairman,
Ukraine attaches great importance to this session.
We look forward to in-depth discussion on achieving the objective of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear-weapons, as well as on
practical confidence-building measures in the field of conventional weapons.
Ukraine’s historic decision to renounce nuclear weapons and become a
non-nuclear weapon state has accorded Ukraine a position in the
forefront of the international community’s quest to abolish nuclear weapons.
We consistently stand for global reduction of nuclear arsenals, stopping the
modernization of nuclear weapons, and overall decrease of nuclear weapons'
role in military and strategic doctrines of states.
In this light, we call on all states, possessing nuclear weapons, to
apply the principles of irreversibility and verifiability to disarmament
process. Ukraine believes that such states have to commit themselves to
reducing the role of nuclear weapons in their national security strategies.
Mr Chairman,
Ukraine strongly supports full and effective implementation and
strengthening of the legal and institutional multilateral mechanisms to
prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons, related materials, equipment and
technologies as essential for nuclear disarmament.
Making very significant contributions to the international goals of
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, Ukraine removed all highly
enriched uranium stocks from its territory and renounced huge arsenals of
nuclear weapons inherited from the Soviet Union. The amounts of these
deadly weapons were outstanding - over 222 units of strategic armaments on
its territory (176 intercontinental ballistic missiles, 46 heavy bombers as well
as relevant nuclear equipment - 2000 nuclear charges that composed
approximately 10 % of carriers and 20 % of charges). This arsenal was the
third largest in the world, bigger than that of Britain, China, and France
combined. Ukraine’s accession to the NPT as a non-nuclear state was
accompanied by receipt of security assurances stipulated by the

Budapest Memorandum. It was a key component of Ukraine’s accession
process that guaranteed the country’s security, political independence and
territorial integrity within the existing borders. However, two decades
after signing the Budapest Memorandum its provisions have been
flagrantly breached by the Russian Federation, one of the Stateguarantors, through an armed invasion into the Ukrainian territory,
attempted annexation of the Crimean peninsula and fuelling the conflict in the
Donbas region of Ukraine.
As these serious violations have been committed, I underline, by the
state-guarantor, they have broader international repercussions in terms
of undermining global disarmament and, especially, non-proliferation.
Therefore, it remains critically important to maintain international
solidarity and unity in seeking restoration of full respect by Russia for
Ukraine’s sovereignty, political unity and internationally recognized
frontiers as a matter of restoration of respect for basic norms of
international law and credibility of security assurances.
My country continues to consider the NPT to be the cornerstone of
the process of global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. Based
on the national experience, Ukraine is convinced that the credibility of
security assurances must be upgraded to an international legally
binding instrument which would significantly enhance the nuclear nonproliferation regime, improve mutual trust and overall stability.
The nuclear disarmament should be approached through
embracing in good faith the following steps:
- entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT);
- verifiable and non-discriminatory treaty banning the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT);
- commencement of negotiations on a post-New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty (START);
- strengthening existing nuclear-weapon-free zones and creating new
nuclear-weapon-free zones and WMD free zones;
- promoting full implementation of the 2005 Amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material;
- strengthening the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
safeguards system.
We also believe that against the backdrop of different positions on the
means to achieve the total elimination of nuclear weapons, identifying and
developing practical and effective measures of nuclear disarmament
verification and monitoring will foster confidence and contribute to the efforts
to attaining the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
Thank you, Mr Chairman

