Statement by
Department of State
United States of America

Cluster 1
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
May 3,2012

Cluster 1 - U.S. Statement
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

In his April 2009 speech in Prague, President Obama highlighted the nuclear
dangers of the 21" century and declared that, to overcome these threats, the United
States reaffirms our enduring commitment "to seek the peace and security of a
world without nuclear weapons." Speaking in Seoul this past March, the President
reaffirmed U.S. support for this goal and highlighted the near-term, practical steps
that the United States is taking to move in that direction.

At the 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference,
NPT Parties pulled together to reaffirm their support for the Treaty as a vital
instrument of global security and their own security. Essential to that reaffirmation
was the Parties' agreement on a forward-looking Action Plan that includes steps
toward the goal of nuclear disarmament. The United States is committed to
working with all other countries to implement the Action Plan effectively. By
supporting the Action Plan, the United States reaffirms our commitment to the
principles of irreversibility, verifiability, and transparency as necessary building
blocks of nuclear disarmament.

The United States is committed to leading by example by working toward
fulfilling the nuclear and non-nuclear disarmament obligations of Article VI of the
NPT and the commitments in the 20 10 NPT Action Plan.

Mr. Chairman, the United States has been reducing our inventory of nuclear
weapons for more than four decades. By September 2009, the U.S. nuclear
1

stockpile was reduced by 84% to approximately 5,000 nuclear warheads from its
peak of approximately 3 1,000 nuclear warheads in 1967. During this period, the
United States unilaterally reduced our non-strategic nuclear warheads by 90%.

The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START), which entered
into force on February 5,201 1, is a further demonstration of the commitment of
the United States to work toward President Obama's ultimate goal of a world
without nuclear weapons. When the Treaty is fully implemented, the strategic
nuclear forces of the United States and Russia will reach their lowest level since
the 1950s. The rigorous and extensive verification provisions of the New START
Treaty testify to the importance of transparency and effective verification in
providing predictability and stability in international relations. I would like to
encourage all delegations to attend the side event on the New START Treaty that
will be presented by the United States and the Russian Federation today at 13:15 in
this Plenary Hall.

When President Obama signed the New START Treaty in April 2010, he
said that the United States will pursue a future agreement with Russia for broad
reductions in all categories of nuclear weapons - strategic, non-strategic, deployed
and non-deployed. To this end, the United States seeks to promote strategic
stability and to increase transparency on a reciprocal basis with Russia.

As President Obama repeated in Seoul in March, the goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons will not be reached quickly. The President noted that, as long as
nuclear weapons exist, the United States will maintain a safe, secure, and effective
arsenal, both to deter potential adversaries and to assure U.S. allies and other
security partners that they can count on the security commitments undertaken by

the United States. The President also said in Seoul that, after New START is
implemented, we will still have more nuclear weapons than we need. The United
States is now conducting the follow-on analysis called for in the 2010 U.S. Nuclear
Posture Review (NPR) to set goals for future nuclear reductions in line with
strategic requirements. Meanwhile, the NPR has ruled out the development of new
U.S. nuclear warheads and new missions and capabilities for existing warheads.

Mr. Chairman, the United States has also demonstrated leadership through
unilateral transparency measures. Examples include the U.S. release in 2010 of the
U.S. nuclear weapons stockpile figures and articulation in the 2010 NPR of the
reduced role of nuclear weapons in the U.S. national strategy. In addition, the U.S.
nuclear community is exploring the technical steps needed to ensure irreversibility,
verifiability, and transparency as essential building blocks of nuclear disarmament.
We are also considering ways to collaborate with other NPT Parties in this
undertaking.

Since the 2010 NPT Review Conference, the five NPT nuclear-weapon
states (also known as the "P5") have met regularly to discuss our commitments in
the Conference's Action Plan. Following the 2009 London and 201 1 Paris P5
conferences, the United States will host a P5 conference in Washington June 27 29,2012. The P5 process now underway is expanding the long-standing U.S.Russia nuclear disarmament dialogue into an ongoing process of P5 engagement
on issues related to nuclear disarmament, consistent with our obligations under
Article VI of the NPT and our commitments under the 2010 NPT Action Plan.

Mr. Chairman, in the area of nuclear testing, President Obama pledged in his
Prague speech that his administration would pursue U.S. ratification of the

3

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). The Administration has been
engaging with the U.S. Senate on the CTBT, laying the groundwork for positive
Senate reconsideration of the Treaty. At the same time, the United States has
continued to support completion of the CTBT's monitoring and verification
regime.

The last U.S. test of a nuclear explosive device was in September 1992.
Since then, the United States has maintained a voluntary moratorium on nuclear
explosive testing. The United States remains committed to this moratorium, and
calls upon all states to refrain from nuclear explosive testing. The 2010 NPR
reiterated that the United States no longer requires nuclear explosive testing to
ensure the safety and effectiveness of our remaining nuclear weapons, relying
instead on our long-standing Stockpile Stewardship Program.
Mr. Chairman, with regard to fissile material, the United States has not
produced highly enriched uranium (HEU) for weapons since 1964 or produced
plutonium for weapons since 1988. The United States has worked with Russia for
a number of years to eliminate excess stocks of HEU and plutonium that could be
used in nuclear warheads. In July 201 1, the United States and Russia brought the
Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement and its 2006 and 2010
Protocols into force, committing each country to dispose of at least 34 metric tons
of excess weapon-grade plutonium. This is enough for a total of 17,000 nuclear
weapons. The United States remains committed to completing an agreement with
Russia and the IAEA to enable the Agency to verify each side's disposition
programs. The United States also remains committed to negotiation of a fissile
material cutoff treaty that would ban the production of fissile material for use in
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices as an essential and the next

4

logical multilateral step toward disarmament and an important foundation for
future nuclear reductions. We deeply regret that the Conference on Disarmament
has failed to take up treaty negotiations, but we will continue with our partners to
look for a productive path forward.

Mr. Chairman, an early and significant demonstration of U.S. commitment
to the goal of general and complete disarmament was the 1969 U.S. decision to
unilaterally dismantle our biological weapons program, and our leadership role in
negotiating the 1975 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC). Over the
years, we have also contributed to strengthening the BWC and have led efforts to
address changing threats through the BWC. Most recently, for example, Secretary
Clinton unveiled a new U.S. Bio Transparency and Openness Initiative at the 201 1
BWC Review Conference.

With regard to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), the United States
remains fully committed to achieving 100 percent destruction of chemical weapons
as soon as practicable, consistent with the Convention's imperatives of public
safety, environmental protection, and international transparency and oversight. We
have destroyed approximately 90% of our chemical weapons stockpile, and
provided financial and technical aid to other CWC States Parties for the
elimination of their declared CW stockpiles.

The United States is also a participating State or State Party to Vienna
Document 201 1 on Confidence- and Security-Building Measures, the Open Skies
Treaty, and the Conventional Arrned Forces in Europe Treaty, which constitute the
three conventional arms control pillars in Europe. We continue to actively engage
with NATO Allies, Russia, and other partners to determine current and future

requirements in an effort to modernize the conventional arms control regime in
Europe.

The United States has contributed to conventional weapons disarmament
efforts in other ways as well. For example, we have ended all use of persistent
landmines, provided more than $1.9 billion in aid in over 80 countries for
conventional weapons destruction programs, and cooperated with countries to
destroy approximately 33,000 man-portable air defense systems in over 30
countries.
Mr. Chairman, the United States recognizes the special responsibility of the
nuclear-weapon states to make progress toward nuclear disarmament. But all NPT
Parties can contribute to the Treaty's disarmament goals, both by pursuing
disarmament steps themselves and by taking other steps to help create the
conditions for such progress. This is by necessity an area of shared responsibility.
In addition, progress on disarmament under the NPT is integrally linked to
nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy, for which we all have shared
responsibility - nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states alike.

Mr. Chairrnan, in conclusion, implementation of President Obama's Prague
agenda and the 2010 NPT Action Plan is well underway. Much progress has been
achieved, yet much remains to be done. The United States will continue to work
toward fulfilling our obligations under Article VI of the NPT and our commitments
under the Action Plan. The United States will also continue to urge other NPT
Parties to do the same. As Article VI makes clear, all NPT Parties have a role to
play in disarmament.

