

The United States has long recognized the importance that many non-nuclear-weapon state NPT parties attach to the question of security assurances. Aggression accompanied by the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would endanger international peace and security. 
In 1968, we joined the other NPT Depositary Governments in declaring that the United States would seek immediate assistance from the Security Council for any NPT non-nuclear-weapon state that is threatened with aggression involving nuclear weapons or that is the victim of aggression in which nuclear weapons are used. At the same time U.N. Security Council Resolution 255 recognized that this would create a situation in which the Council would have to act immediately in accordance with its obligations under the U.N. Charter. 
In 1978, President Carter issued a declaration against the use of nuclear weapons toward NPT non-nuclear-weapon states. As stated by then Secretary of State Vance, the President provided this negative security assurance to encourage support for nuclear non-proliferation and to enhance the prospects for more effective arms control and disarmament. 
In 1995, Secretary of State Christopher issued a declaration by President Clinton on negative security assurances that reaffirmed the policy first stated in 1978. France, Russia, and the United Kingdom joined the United States in 1995 and issued nearly identical assurances. China also made a statement on security assurances. We affirmed the continued commitment of the United States to this assurance in our April 27 statement to this Committee. 
In 1995, all five NPT nuclear weapon states supported United Nations Security Council Resolution 984 which passed unanimously on April 11. This resolution reinforced security assurances for NPT non-nuclear-weapon states by noting the national declarations and providing a description of how the U.N. Security Council could assist a NPT non-nuclear-weapon state threatened with nuclear weapons or the victim of such aggression. This resolution noted that among the means available to the Council are measures to restore international peace and security. The May 1, 2000 Statement by the NPT nuclear weapon states indicated their readiness to exchange views on the positive security assurances referred to in resolution 984. 
Legally-binding assurances against the use of nuclear weapons have long been a goal of many NPT parties. There has been continued progress in this area. Since the 1995 NPT Conference, the United States and other NPT nuclear weapon states have signed or ratified Protocols to the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and the African Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty. This increases the number of NPT non-nuclear-weapon states eligible for legally-binding negative security assurances from all five nuclear weapons states from 32 to around 100. Moreover, the nuclear weapon states are continuing consultations with parties to the Southeast Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Treaty with the goal of resolving issues on the Protocol. We are hopeful that the negotiations by Central Asian nations will lead to a treaty that all can support and that there will soon be formal consultations with the nuclear weapon states on the draft treaty and protocol. 
The United States joined with others in supporting the reestablishment of the Ad Hoc Committee on effective international arrangements against the use of nuclear weapons at the Conference on Disarmament in 1998. We regret there has been insufficient consensus over the past two years to proceed with the work of this Committee. 
Some have dismissed as inadequate the foregoing record of progress on security assurances. Many continue to press for the negotiation of a global treaty to provide negative security assurances or to make Security Council assistance automatic. But the fact is that there is no consensus that would allow such ideas to be accepted. We must do what is possible and not expend time trying to accomplish the unachievable. We believe that the high-level political assurances and legal undertakings outlined above represent a strong regime of security assurances for NPT non-nuclear-weapon states. We are ready to consider other ideas that would advance our mutual goals in this area.

