Mr. Chairman:
Please allow me to congratulate you on your election to guide the activities of this Main Committee. You may count on the full cooperation of the Argentine Delegation.
Gathered at this meeting, prepared once again to carry out the tasks of the Committee on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, International Disarmament and Peace and Security, and ten years after the historic moment when the treaty was extended indefinitely, it seems necessary to emphasize the validity of the decisions which were agreed on disarmament and to revise the weaknesses in their implementation.
The Argentine Delegation wishes to see the general disarmament and non-proliferation nuclear regime strengthened by this Review Conference.
The three NPT pillars, disarmament, non-proliferation and pacific use of nuclear energy are not watertight compartments. Far from that, Argentina considers them 10 be intimately related and welcomes the progress made in the three areas, but does not subordinate progress in any one of them to equal progress in another.
As duly stated on the occasion of the General Debate, the international scenario has changed dramatically over the last five years. The agreements which the 2000 Review Conference Delegates put so much energy into, have deteriorated as a result of attempts to dilute the commitments assumed.
North Korea's withdrawal from the NPT and the announcement, two months ago, that it has nuclear weapons, is one of the most unfortunate facts that this Review Conference must face. Argentina is convinced that the international community must respond with determination to the development of nuclear weapons outside the NPT or to noncompliance with the NPT, thus a higher commitment is expected in this regard on the part of Security Council members.
In addition, Argentina stresses the need for States; Parties to continue urging NPT non- member countries to join it as non-nuclear weapon countries.
It is striking to see that some nuclear countries argue that the progress in nuclear disarmament, provided for by Article VI, should be subject to progress with conventional weapons, thus avoiding, in a certain way, an unequivocal commitment of nuclear- weapon States to really eliminate their nuclear arsenal.
In relation to the "Thirteen Steps", Argentina is worried about the involution or stagnation - which have characterized the five years that have elapsed since the last Review Conference - in the application of steps 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7.
In this regard, nine years after the adoption of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) it is surprising to see that a dozen countries, whose ratification is necessary for the Treaty to enter into force, have not yet ratified it.
In addition, it is disconcerting that the Disarmament Conference should have not yet begun negotiations for a fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT), which Argentina hopes will be irreversible and non-discriminatory, or established, due to lack of agreement on a Working Program, an appropriate subsidiary agency with the mandate of dealing with the nuclear disarmament issue.
The irreversibility principle if applied transparently, and verifiably, to nuclear disarmament and nuclear-weapon control and reduction measures, will validate and give a new boost to NPT States not to develop nuclear weapons. In this way, the relinquishment of nuclear weapons by non-nuclear-weapon States and gradually by nuclear-weapon States may one day be irreversible.
Argentina fosters the creation of a subsidiary organ on Security Assurances (NSA), so that the States that give up nuclear weapons may in the meantime secure a commitment by nuclear-weapon States never to use them against them. In this regard, Argentina welcomes the European Union Council Common Position - especially taking into account that two nuclear-weapon States are European Union members - which "calls on nuclear-weapon States to reaffirm the existing securities adopted by the United Nations Security Council in Resolution 984 (1995) and to sign and ratify the relevant protocols on nuclear weapon free areas, acknowledging that these assurances are granted in Treaties
With respect to disarmament, tactical weapons are also a concern to Argentina. In this regard, the role of the New Agenda Coalition should be pointed out in terms of directing the attention of States Parties to the threat such weapons pose to international security and of the need for them to join the disarmament and weapons control agreements. In addition, Argentina regrets to see new security doctrines which do not reject the use of nuclear weapons.
It is necessary for the P-5 to recognize the fact that long-held view of keeping nuclear weapons as an essential element in their security systems is the essence of the discourse of those who publicly or illegally promo :e policies of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
It is clear that the concrete results that Argentina hopes will result from the work clone by this Committee, which will surely contribute to strengthening the commitment to disarmament are: 1) the consolidation of a culture of presentation of Reports and of transparency, 2) a clear mandate for the work of the Disarmament Conference, 3) a new P-5 commitment to weapons control and to nuclear disarmament, and last but not least, that our discussions take place in an open negotiation and cooperation framework in order to reach consensus.
Mr. Chairman, dear Delegates, four weeks of hard work are ahead of us. We hope they will lead to the results we so much look forward to.
Thank you.

