2013 session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I Statement by Mr Paul Wilson
Australian Permanent Mission to the United Nations, Geneva
25 April 2013
Mr Chairman,
Over the past year, Australia has continued its efforts to build on its long-standing
commitment to nuclear disarmament. While we recognise the collective challenges
ahead, making progress on nuclear disarmament is not an abstract goal; the 2010
Action Plan lays out real, concrete steps we can all take to move further towards a
world without nuclear weapons.
We urge all States parties to work collectively and cooperatively to implement the
Action Plan and to show their commitment to working towards the total, verifiable
and irreversible elimination of nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman,
Through the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), the ten-nation
cross-regional grouping established to support and encourage the implementation of
the 2010 NPT Action Plan across all three pillars, Australia has continued to urge
nuclear-weapon States to pursue nuclear disarmament in good faith.
Australia welcomes US President Barack Obama’s announcement during this year’s
State of the Union Address of the United States’ intention to work with Russia on
further reductions in nuclear arsenals. We look forward to developments in this
regard.
But further efforts are required from all nuclear-weapon States – and indeed from all
other States possessing nuclear weapons. Expectations are growing, particularly as we
approach the 2014 PrepCom.
Australia encourages the nuclear-weapon States to make progress on a standard
nuclear disarmament reporting form, consistent with Action 21 and in support of
Action 5 and Action 20 commitments. The draft form developed by the NPDI in 2011

is intended to aid nuclear-weapon States discussions in this regard. Greater
transparency from the nuclear-weapon States will help create conditions more
conducive to further progress in disarmament.
Australia, together with fellow NPDI members, reiterates the importance of further
reducing the role and significance of nuclear weapons in military doctrine. Australia
calls on the nuclear-weapon States to work proactively in delegitimising the use of
nuclear weapons by making declaratory policies in line with Action 5.
Australia, with its fellow NDPI members, also urges the inclusion of non-strategic
nuclear weapons in any future nuclear disarmament processes, with a view to their
elimination, and a cessation of the development and production of new nuclear
weapons.
Mr Chairman,
All States – the nuclear-weapon States, non-nuclear-weapon States and the States
outside the NPT – have a shared responsibility to make progress on disarmament.
In this regard, Australia continues to be deeply disappointed by the failure of the
Conference on Disarmament (CD) to do the work assigned to it, including by the NPT
membership under Actions 6, 7 and 15. The failure to commence negotiations on the
long-overdue Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty – which would ban the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices – is
particularly notable. An FMCT is an essential step for the elimination of nuclear
weapons and remains a key Australian priority. Pending negotiations, all States
possessing nuclear weapons should declare and maintain a moratorium on the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons.
Australia and many other CD Member States have continued to engage constructively
with successive CD Presidents in seeking to break the CD’s impasse. The CD’s
failure continues to call into question its role and threatens its very future as a forum
for negotiation. At its 67th session in 2012, the General Assembly made its concerns
clear by adopting two key resolutions: resolution 67/53, establishing a group of
governmental experts to make recommendations on possible aspects of a FMCT; and
resolution 67/56, establishing an open-ended working group on taking forward
multilateral disarmament negotiations.
Australia supported both resolutions and intends to participate in the open-ended
working group, along with the preparatory work for the group of governmental
experts with a view to helping take the 2010 RevCon agenda forward and bring fresh
impetus to the work the CD should be doing and can still do.
Mr Chairman,

Australia remains deeply disappointed that the world is still awaiting the entry into
force of the CTBT. The CTBT is intrinsically linked to the goals and objectives of the
NPT and CTBT entry into force is a major Australian priority. The 12 February
nuclear test by Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which Australia has strongly
condemned as both a serious violation of Security Council resolutions 1718, 1874 and
2087 and a grave challenge to the NPT, once again underscores the importance of the
ratification and entry into force of the CTBT.
Australia, together with the other NPDI member states, again urges all remaining
Annex 2 States – including those outside the NPT – to ratify the treaty without delay.
They should not wait for other States to ratify the Treaty.
In the last year, Australia has continued its efforts, consistent with Action 13, to
strengthen the CTBT pending its entry into force. Australian Foreign Minister Carr
co-chaired the “Friends of the CTBT” ministerial meeting in New York last
September. Australia, with Mexico and New Zealand, also again led the annual First
Committee resolution underlining the urgency of the CTBT’s entry into force and the
importance of upholding and maintaining moratoria. Among the over one hundred cosponsors to this resolution, all Annex 2 States that have ratified the CTBT, as well as
the other two nuclear-weapons States, co-sponsored. This is a clear and timely signal
that the CTBT needs to enter into force and that nuclear tests must end.
In preparation for entry into force, Australia has also been giving additional support to
the verification capacity of the CTBT’s International Monitoring System (IMS), again
consistent with Action 13. Twenty of the 21 IMS facilities planned for Australia are
now operational. In 2012, Australia and New Zealand signed a bilateral cooperation
agreement that provides for collaboration between experts in our two countries on
analysing events detected by the CTBT’s IMS that might be indicative of a nuclear
explosion. We hope frameworks of this kind will help to promote a robust and
scientific peer review of such analyses, and thus to maintain the credibility of the
CTBT’s verification mechanism.
Mr Chairman,
Australia acknowledges South Africa’s contribution to this meeting through its
statement on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. As we noted in our general
debate statement, the discussions at the Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of
Nuclear Weapons in Oslo this year, in which Australia participated, illustrated once
more the devastating immediate and long-term humanitarian effects of a nuclear
weapon detonation. This is why we strive to realise the goal of a world without
nuclear weapons, including through implementation of the 2010 Action Plan.

In this context, Australia agrees that it is a shared responsibility of all States to
prevent the use of nuclear weapons, to prevent their vertical and horizontal
proliferation and to achieve nuclear disarmament, including through fulfilling the
objectives of the NPT and achieving its universality.
Australia welcomes the offer of fellow NPDI member Mexico to convene a follow-up
conference on this issue.
Mr Chairman,
Disarmament and non-proliferation efforts are mutually reinforcing. The adherence to
disarmament commitments will allow us to reach our goal of a world without nuclear
weapons; adherence to the non-proliferation regime will do the same, and in the long
term, allow us to maintain a world without nuclear weapons.
Working towards the fulfilment of the 2010 Action Plan is the way to ensure progress
across all three pillars of the NPT and to continue down the path of making the world
free of nuclear weapons and thus a safer place for all.
I thank you, Mr Chairman.

