Check against delivery

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Statement for Main Committee I
Delegation of Austria
07 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,
The nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments under the NPT, including the
outcomes of past NPT Review Conferences in this area, are a further development
and operationalization of the Article VI treaty obligation.
In 2010, nuclear weapon states were called upon to accelerate concrete progress
leading to nuclear disarmament and their prompt engagement on specific actions in
this regard as well as the implementation of the Start Treaty. We acknowledge the
steps taken by individual nuclear weapon states, however it should be of greatest
concern to the Conference that the reporting of the nuclear weapon states in
accordance with Action 5 demonstrates their continued reliance on nuclear weapons,
with little or no changes in policy. The ongoing modernization of nuclear arsenals by
the nuclear weapon states cannot be seen as compatible with the spirit and the letter
of this Treaty. While the reporting by nuclear weapon states does unfortunately not
provide information on the resources that go into the maintenance and
modernization of nuclear weapon systems, however, as we speak about nuclear
disarmament in this room, we are receiving news reports about modernization plans
and programs at the scale of billions of dollars. Reliance on nuclear weapons
increases the risk of proliferation, in fact incites proliferation and increases the risk of
the use of nuclear weapons, be it accidentally or intentionally. There has been little
sign of prompt or accelerated progress on the actions called for by Action 5. The
Review Conference should call on all States to refrain from any actions that are
contrary to the spirit and purpose of the Treaty or the obligations and commitments
from the previous Review Conferences, in particular in light of the disarmament
obligations and commitments.
Overall, we must conclude that we cannot see sufficiently credible progress on the
actions that only nuclear weapon states can fulfill, clearly affirming their
determination to implement the obligations and commitments under the Treaty. In
Austria’s view, there is a clear contradiction in the continued reliance on nuclear

weapons, modernization and long-term investments on the one hand and declaring
support for nuclear disarmament and a world without nuclear weapons on the other
hand. We see a fundamental credibility deficit which we cannot ignore if we wish this
treaty to remain credible for both – nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation. And
because there is a credibility gap with regard to the implementation of Art. VI, there is
a need to fill the legal gap for the elimination and prohibition of nuclear weapons.
There is no doubt that the implementation of our Treaty obligation for achieving and
maintaining a nuclear weapon free world is a shared responsibility of all states
parties. In line with Action 1, states parties have during the past years increased their
understanding of the unacceptable humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapon
detonations that would have trans-boundary effects that could not be responded to
in any adequate way and the unacceptable risks associated with the existence of
these weapons. It is this knowledge that has increased the sense of urgency among
non-nuclear weapon states, as evidenced by the support of 159 States for the joint
statement. Credible and measurable benchmarks should be established at this
Conference in order to monitor and assess the future implementation of the Treaty
obligations and commitments concerning nuclear disarmament, including through
reporting. Most importantly, in line with Article VI, effective measures must be put in
place at a multilateral level in order to fulfill this Treaty obligation. The legal gap for
the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons must be filled, as more than 80
states parties are calling for in support of the pledge presented by Austria at the
Vienna Conference. We remain open regarding the process in which this is to be
achieved; what is required is credible progress and a determination and urgency to
achieve results.
The UN and international organizations, the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
elected representatives and civil society have been playing a crucial role throughout
this cycle for advancing the goals of the Treaty, and in particular in the area of nuclear
disarmament. We wish to see their role adequately reflected in the outcome of this
Conference. We have during this Conference at numerous occasions reiterated the
importance of disarmament and non-proliferation education. I would at this stage
only recall the recommendation that disarmament education should be well placed in
education curricula for the benefit of future generations, but also that world leaders
as well as disarmament delegates should visit Hiroshima, Nagasaki as well as
locations where nuclear testing took place and engage directly with testimonies.
I thank you.

Mr Chairman,
Let me congratulate you on the assumption of this important function. My delegation
looks forward to working with you in the coming days and weeks to achieve a
ambitious, strong and credible outcome that will strengthen the NPT .
. We already explained in the General Debate, the reasons why we are gravely
concerned about the disappointing degree of implementation of Article VI of the
Treaty, the commitments undertaken in 1995 and 2000 and of the actions contained
in the disarmament part of the 2010 Action Plan.
We also explained that we consider the absence of a clear move away from reliance
on nuclear weapons and statements and, in fact, contrary actions in nuclear weapons
States, such as nuclear weapons modernization plans and resource allocations, as a
fundamental threat to the credibility of the NPT. Austria is convinced that we can only
do this through a collective and determined move away from nuclear weapons all
together through strong nonproliferation measures and credible and urgent nuclear
disarmament.
We believe. that the humanitarian imperative, the increased understanding of the
unacceptable humanitarian consequences and the risks associated with the mere
existence of nuclear weapons provide the arguments and the urgency to finally take
these determined steps.
Mr. Chairman,
Austria had the honor to coordinate the latest statement on the humanitarian
consequences by the so-called "Group of 16". This latest statement, delivered by
Austria's Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz, was supported by 159 States. To our
knowledge, this is the highest number of UN member states ever supporting a crossregional declaration on a particular substantive issue. It reflects the shared sense of
concern about the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons and the deep
implications for human survival, for our environment, for socio-economic
development, and for the health of future generations. It is in the interest of the very
survival · of humanity that these weapons are never used again, under any
circumstances. The catastrophic effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by
accident or miscalculation or design, cannot be adequately addressed. All efforts
must thus be exerted to eliminate the threat of these weapqns of mass destruction.
The only guarantee for this is through their total elimination.

It is of key importance for the credibility of the NPT and the work that we do on
nuclear disarmament in this committee that this views, which is shared by the
overwhelming majority of States and citizens in our interconnected world, . is
adequately reflected, as it must underpin all approaches and efforts towards nuclear
disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
I have also the pleasure to introduce Working Paper 30 on the humanitarian impact
of nuclear weapons on behalf of Chile, Costa Rica, Egypt, Holy .See, Indonesia,
Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland and Austria.
This working Paper provides an account of the developments in the past review cycle
with respect to the work on humanitarian consequences. It highlights in particular the
growing international focus on the substantive aspects of the humanitarian initiative,
through the joint cross-regional statements as well · as the three international
conferences in Osio, Nayarit and Vienna and the evidence that was presented there.
We. consider this focus as key positive development of the past review cycle that we
wish to see reflected in the review part of the final document.
In the pursuit . of the key · objectives of the NPT and the full and effective
. implementation of the Treaty and the obligations and commitments on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation reached at the previous Review Conferences, the
working paper also makes the following recommendations to the 2015 Review
Conference for inclusion in the fori.vard looking part of the final document:

i.
ii.

iii.

iv.

To welcome that during the past review cycle, findings and evidence on the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons have been presented in fact-based
discussions, including at international conferences. ·
To recognize that the immediate, mid- and long-term consequences of nuclear
weapon detonations inter alia on health, environment, · infrastructure, food
security, climate, development, social cohesion .and the global economy are
significantly graver than previously understood, interlinked, and would not be
constrained by. national borders but have regional or global effects, and may
even threaten the survival of humanity.
To be aware that the risk of a nuclear weapon explosion is significantly greater
than previously assumed and is further increasing with proliferation, the
lowering of the technical threshold for nuclear weapon capability and with the
danger of the access to nuclear weapons and related material by terrorist
groups.
To express dismay at the unacceptable humanitarian consequences of any
use of nuclear weapons and to reaffirm the need for all States at all times to
comply with applicable international la¥f, including international humanitarian
law.

v.

vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
xi.

xii.

To recognize that new evidence that has emerged about the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons casts further doubt on whether these
weapons could ever be used in conformity with international law, in particular
international humanitarian law.
To emphasize that the consequences of nuclear weapon detonations and the
risks associated with this weaponry concern the security of all humanity.
To affirm that it is in the interest of the very survival of humanity that nuclear
weapons are never used again, under any circumstances.
To be cognisant of the fact that the .risk of nuclear Weapons' use can only be
avoided through the total elimination of nuclear weapons and maintenance of
a world free of nuclear weapons.
.
To emphasize that the scope of consequences of a nuclear weapon
detonation and risks associated raise profound moral and ethical questions.
To commit to further enhance awareness of the humanitarian· impact of and
risks associated with nuclear weapons with a view to increasing the urgency
with which a world without nuclear weapons is pursued and achieved.
To call on the nuclear-weapon States, pending the total elimination of their
nuclear weapon arsenals, to take concrete interim measures with urgency to
reduce the risk of nuclear weapon detonations and to increase their
transparency and accountability in this regard.
To stress that in light of the growing understanding of the risk posed by
nuclear weapons and their devastating humanitarian consequences, there is
an urgent need for the full implementation of existing obligations under the
NPT and its previous Review Conferences to identify and pursue effective
measures for the achievement of a world without nuclear weapons, and to call
on all States parties to spare no efforts in this regard.

Mr. Chairman,
I would also like to introduce behalf of Austria, Working Paper 29 entitled "The
Vienna Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons (8-9 December
2014) and the Austrian Pledge: Input on for the NPT 2015 Review Conference''.
With this working paper, Austria wishes to transmit to the NPT Review Conference
the substantive conclusions contained in the Chair's Summary of the Vienna
Conference.
The discussions and findings with respect to the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons, the risks associated with the existence of these weapons, as well
as the legal and moral dimension of this weaponry constitute a powerful set of
arguments that should lead to an urgent and profound change in the nuclear
weapons debate.
Austria also issued a national pledge which highlighted a number of inescapable
conclusions that we think need to be drawn from the evidence that has been
presented in the course of the humanitarian initiative. Con.sequently, Austria pledged
inter alia to
i.

to present the facts-based discussions, findings and compelling
evidence of the Vienna Conference, which builds upon the previous
conferences in Oslo and Nayarit, to all relevant fora, in particular the
NPT Review Conference 2015 and in the UN framework, as they should

.'
ii.

iii.

be at the centre of all deliberations, obligations and commitments with
regard tO nuclear disarll'lament,
to call on all States parties to the NPT to renew their .commitment to the
urgent and full implementation of existing obligations under Article VI,
and to this end, to identify and pursue effective measures to fill the legal
gap for the prohibition and elimination of nuclear. weapons and Austria
pledges to cooperate with all stakeholders to achieve this goal,
to cooperate with all relevant stakehol(jers, in efforts to stigmatize,
prohibit and eliminate nuclear weapons in light of their unacceptable
humanitarian consequences and associated.

Austria is grateful that more than 70 States have decided to support and/or endorse
, this pledge to date.
Mr Chairman, Austria therefore expects that this Review Conference will put a
credible process in place to identify and pursue effective measures to fill the legal
gap for the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons as required for by Article
VI of the NPT.
Thank you
