Statement for Cluster I (Disarmament)
Second Preparatory Committee for the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018
Mr Chairman
Australia maintains its abiding commitment to
working towards the ultimate goal of a world without
nuclear weapons.
The framework for doing so is the NPT, including its
Article 6 disarmament commitments.
The security environment has deteriorated since we
met last year in Vienna and geopolitical tensions have
increased markedly. Confidence and trust building
efforts are needed now more than ever.
An issue of keen and long-standing regional interest
to Australia is the threat posed by the DPRK’s nuclear
weapons program. Like others, we hope that current
efforts at dialogue will lead to the DPRK taking
concrete, verifiable and irreversible steps to
denuclearise. But pending that, to this end,
1

maximum diplomatic and economic pressure must be
maintained on the DPRK.
The ongoing implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) regarding Iran
has shown that shared determination can lead to
progress even in very challenging settings. We urge all
parties to ensure their continued compliance with all
provisions of the agreement. Australia maintains its
strong support for the JCPOA.
In another WMD context, the abhorrent recent use of
chemical weapons in Syria, Malaysia and the UK has
underlined the need for vigilance on compliance with
treaty obligations and accountability for violation of
international laws.
Mr Chairman
In such a complex environment, there is the
temptation to think it is all too hard, and to fall back
on familiar lines, which do little to bridge divisions.
That is not a viable way forward. Our task is to
progress nuclear disarmament. We must instead
focus on common ground and inclusive approaches,
and reduce polarisation.
Affirming the Treaty’s centrality is essential for global
security and the international rules-based order.

2

Mr Chairman
Australia is realistic about the challenges of achieving
significant disarmament in the current environment.
We can do this in a pragmatic, smart, concrete, and
incremental way. This includes through the crossregional Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative, which works to bridge divisions and find
common ground.
Most recently, the US and Russia have reached their
central limits under NewSTART, a positive
development which should be acknowledged. The
next challenge is how to ensure an environment more
conducive to extending NewSTART.
We urge nuclear weapons states themselves to take
the lead in demonstrating concrete results on nuclear
disarmament. On nuclear risk reduction, we were
pleased with recent useful exchanges in the UN
Disarmament Commission which completed the first
year of its new cycle last week. As UNDC Chair, we
would welcome further UNDC progress on risk
reduction as a positive contribution to the goals of the
2020 NPT Review Conference.

3

Mr Chairman
The NPT belongs to all of us, so we must all take a
hard look at what we can do to rebuild cooperation
and improve security.
For example, detailed work on elements for a future
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty will make a substantive
contribution to future negotiations. As a member of
the UNGA-mandated High-Level FMCT Expert
Preparatory Group, Australia is actively committed to
this issue.
Likewise, serious work on nuclear disarmament
verification is essential. We support the UNGAmandated Group of Governmental Experts as it starts
its important work, and continue to work
collaboratively in the International Partnership for
Nuclear Disarmament Verification to build our
collective toolbox in this field.
In an environment of heightened tensions and
uncertainty, we should prioritise transparency. We
recognise that some nuclear weapons states have
made significant efforts on this front.
National reporting by states on their implementation
of the NPT and the 2010 NPT Action Plan is
important. It is also important that our conversation
about reporting is one that builds understanding. In
this context, I commend to you the NPDI’s paper to
4

this PrepCom about transparency, which suggests
how we might usefully focus on reporting during this
review cycle and beyond.
We remain disappointed that the CTBT is still not
closer to entering into force. However, its norm
against testing is well-entrenched, and its verification
mechanism is already exemplary. We have begun a
conversation on provisional application of substantive
CTBT provisions.
Mr Chairman
To achieve a sustainable world without nuclear
weapons, we need to think more and talk more about
what kind of world that will be, and about how to
maintain it once it exists. This means engaging
frankly about the role of nuclear weapons in security
policies. Like many other states in today’s world,
Australia relies on extended deterrence. One of the
many challenges we face is to promote a world where
countries no longer have the need to rely on nuclear
weapons for their security.

5

We are now in a particularly challenging period for
nuclear disarmament.
Nevertheless, we can take many practical steps –
using a realistic approach focused on where we can
achieve progress.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

6

