Australia
Cluster 1 statement

Mr Chairman
Australia is committed to the goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons, pursued in an effective, determined,
realistic, and pragmatic way.
For Australia, reaching global zero is not only consistent
with clear international obligations under Article VI of
the NPT, but is also a key requirement for making the
world a safer place.
Disturbing recent developments on the Korean Peninsula
provide a potent reality check for all of us. We call on the
DPRK to abandon its nuclear weapon and ballistic
missile development programs. These programs pose a
grave threat to global peace and security, and are in
defiance of UN Security Council resolutions and the
DPRK’s other international obligations.
More broadly, the challenging security environment has
brought into stark focus the challenges facing the NPT.
Mr Chairman
Australia's position on the negotiations currently
underway for a treaty banning nuclear weapons has been
consistent and clear. We do not support such an
approach for reasons of principle and practicality.

It is axiomatic that States will only get rid of their
nuclear arsenals when they feel it is safe to do so. Laying
the ground work to eliminate such weapons requires
much greater trust, more effective verification processes
and assurance that capabilities for developing new
weapons are not being used for that purpose.
Logical and indispensable next steps are the entry-intoforce of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT). In the meantime, we must continue every effort
to strengthen the normative value of the Treaty and
encourage completion of the monitoring system.
All efforts to promote negotiations on a Fissile Material
Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) should also be nurtured. In this
respect, Australia is pleased to be represented on the
High Level Experts Panel on a FMCT, following up our
active representation in the GGE. We will be pleased to
support all efforts under the capable leadership of the
Canadian Chair, Heidi Hulan, to sustain momentum on
this critical track of disarmament. We also encourage the
designation by nuclear-weapons States of fissile material
no longer required for military purposes and the
development of legally binding verification arrangements,
within the context of the IAEA, to ensure the irreversible
removal of such fissile material.
Australia also welcomes and strongly supports the
UNGA71 resolution establishing a Group of Government
Experts on Verification and encourages UN member
States to submit views on measures to develop and
strengthen nuclear disarmament verification. We look
forward to working with Norway to promote the initiative
in 2018 and 2019. We also are actively involved in, and
commend the work of, the International Partnership for
Nuclear Disarmament Verification.

Australia has also been at the forefront of the
constructive, cross regional approach embodied in the
Nuclear Non Proliferation Disarmament Initiative (NPDI).
Despite wide variations of views within the NPDI, for
example on how best to progress nuclear disarmament,
the group has registered a common voice for practical
action across the three pillars. With numerous working
papers and the joint statement issued on 2 May, the
NPDI has been a catalyst for progressing the NPT 2010
Action Plan, as well as promoting increased transparency
by improving arrangements for reporting by NPT nuclear
weapon states on details of their nuclear arsenals.
Mr Chairman
The summary Progressive Approach paper that Australia
submitted to the PrepCom on behalf of twenty-seven
countries outlines the key tenets of our approach which
focuses on concrete, realistic steps to progress
disarmament. There is much that we can do now to
reduce risk, build confidence, and move the agenda
forward in practical ways.
We urge those possessing nuclear weapons to take the
lead in demonstrating concrete results from such
processes. In this regard, we encourage negotiations on a
post-New Start Arms Reduction Treaty (START) between
the US and the Russian Federation.
One proposal nuclear armed states could do now is
enhance transparency with regard to their nuclear
arsenals. This would contribute immediately and
significantly to building confidence and laying the
groundwork for a collective effort to reach global zero.
Mr Chairman

In conclusion, now more than ever is a critical time for
us to protect and strengthen the NPT regime. We must
seize the opportunity of this 2017-2020 NPT review cycle,
and in particular, this NPT PrepCom, to lay a solid
foundation for a successful 2020 Review Conference.

