Belarus' Statement on Nuclear Disarmament, NPT Prepcom 1,2015 RC
2 May 2012
Thank you, Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on this cluster by
Ambassador of Indonesia on behalf of the NAM.
Nuclear disarmament remains highest priority for my country and is considered by
us an ultimate guarantor of non-proliferation and of international peace and
security. The related actions to address the issues of nuclear non-proliferation
could be successfully implemented if they echoed by simultaneous efforts aiming
at nuclear disarmament.
As it has already been stated some positive developments such as the ratification
and starting of implementation of new START, some modest progress in
ratification of the CTBT and nuclear weapon free zones Protocols. However many
areas of concern remain unsettled. As it has been stressed by many speakers, both
from the governments and NGO's implementation of the NPT Action Plan in the
Field of Disarmament leaves much room for further improvement.
Nuclear weapons still play an important role in all military and security concepts
and existing stockpiles are being modernized in all NWS.
Unfortunately, the CD has not been able to fulfill Actions under 2010 NPT Action
Plan to push forward Nuclear Disarmament, FMCT and Nuclear Security
Assurances (Actions 6, 7 and 15 respectively).
The Disarmament Agenda is long overdue. Some issues remains under
consideration of the relevant multilateral disarmament bodies, including the CD,
for more than 30 years. My delegation is of believe that the reason of the impasse
of the Conference is imbalance of State's interests and different visions of national
and regional security. In our opinion further efforts should be explored to rectify
that situation and to start the negotiation engine of the CD. There is a need for
substantial concessions and compromises from the part of nuclear weapon states,
not least from the part of the P5.
We noted with appreciation the initiative of the UN Secretary General to revitalize
the disarmament machinery and push forward the negotiations in the CD. We are
of the view that all actions in ths direction should be taken by the consensus and be
states driven.
Due attention should also be paid in this process to enlargement of the Conference
membership to ensure collective ownership over this important body and
opportunity to contribute overwhelmingly. The issue of the NGO's participation in
the work of the CD should be properly addressed as well.

2
From our opinion the better venue for that process is the Fourth special session of
the General Assembly on Disarmament, the body which invented the CD.

