Let me first of all express my compliments to you, Ambassador Sudjadnan Parnohadiningrat, for assuming the chairmanship of this Main Committee.
Brazil believes that global security can only be accomplished through the total elimination of nuclear weapons and the assurance that they will never be produced or used again.
Five years ago, we welcomed the reiteration of Nuclear-Weapon States of their commitment to nuclear disarmament, by means of the "unequivocal undertaking ~o accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals".
Today, as we review the implementation of these commitments, we cannot avoid the feeling of disappointment and the perception that the promise made by Nuclear-Weapon States towards nuclear disarmament has fallen short of our expectations.
Brazil welcomes unilateral and bilateral measures towards disarmament and acknowledges that the Treaty of Moscow is a positive step. We remain nonetheless concerned about the overall modest progress in terms of effective reductions of nuclear arsenals and consider that the
principles of transparency, international verification and irreversibility must be applied.
The maintenance and reaffirmation of security doctrines that still rely on nuclear weapons and even suggest their possible use against Non-Nuclear Weapon States, associated to the persistent reluctance in extending unconditional legally binding negative security assurances to Non-Nuclear Weapon States, constitute disturbing developments.
Moreover, indications of interest in the development of new kinds of nuclear weapons add an even more worrisome element to this scenario.
All the aspects mentioned above erode the confidence and permanence of the regime based on the NPT.
The pursuit of nuclear disarmament is also necessary for addressing the international community's concern about proliferation. Disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes requiring progress on both fronts.
Progress in nuclear disarmament is all the mere important in a world in which non-state actors may seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Therefore our focus must be on systematic, continuous and progressive efforts to implement the obligation contained in Article VI.
Brazi1 favors due consideration of the following points, which, in our view, would facilitate the ultimate goal of a world free of nuclear weapons:
1st - The Conference should undertake a thorough review of the implementation of the 2000 NPT Final Document, in particular the 13 practical steps towards nuclear disarmament, and reaffirm the need for their further implementation;
2"1 - The Conference should call for the prompt enter into force of the CTBT and the expeditious negotiation, in the Conference of Disarmament:, of a verifiable fissile material Treaty;
31 ° - The Conference should send a strong message that the development of new kinds of nuclear weapons is incompatible with the commitments to nuclear disarmament f-
4cn - The Conference should recommend that Nuclear- Weapon States review their military doctrines in order to reduce the importance and role of nuclear weapons;
5'n - The Conference should seek a commitment by Nuclear-Weapon States not to use nuclear weapons, as a first step, in a process that should lead to the negotiation of a convention to ban their production and use, following the examples of biological and chemical weapons conventions;
6"11 - The Conference should request from Nuclear-Weapon States additional measures, within an agreed time frame, towards the destruction of their nuclear arsenals, in a transparent and internationally verifiable framework;
- The Conference should reiterate the need for
comprehensive, systematic and regular reports, to be submitted as official documents of the Conference, by the Nuclear-Weapon States on their implementation of article
Thank you.
