Mr. Chairman, ,
For my delegation, our general debate in the first days of the present Prepcom Session was especially heartening. States Parties that expressed themselves reaffirmed their commitment to the Treaty and their resolve to contribute to the success of the VIII Review Conference next year.
As far as this cluster on disarmament is concerned, success in 2010 rests on two assumptions. The first is the consolidation of the decisions taken in 1995 and 2000 regarding disarmament and the enunciation of concrete measures to implement them. The second should be a clear disposition to go ahead in the sense of stating a political will to a zero option and to general, complete and irreversible disarmament.
Nothing we heard these last days definitely contradicts this picture. We can expect that very soon all nuclear weapon States will ratify the CTBT and a political movement will take place to encourage ratification by the remaining States required for its entry into force.
We can expect that the Conference on Disarmament, on the basis of an agreed programme of work, will undertake the negotiation of an FMCT. We can expect that the Conference on Disarmament will hold substantive discussions on nuclear disarmament. Those discussions should also address, among other issues, the reduction of nuclear arsenals, the reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, the decrease of the operational status of nuclear weapons and their role in the security policies, the provision of transparency regarding all these measures.
Security assurances from the part of nuclear weapon States to the non-nuclear weapon States are possible and should be provided by means of a legally binding instrument.
The achievement of a Middle East free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery should be continuously sought.
Brazil would like to see these goals expressed in a simple, short statement to be delivered by this Preparatory Committee to the Review Conference. Such document would provide guidance to the decisions we could take together next year.
I thank you.