Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Canada is committed to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons.
It is important to remember that up to 40 states have the knowledge and technology to develop nuclear weapons rapidly and that number is growing. A collapse of the NPT non-proliferation regime could trigger a jump in the number of states with nuclear weapons.
In addition, there remains the prospect of terrorists acquiring and using nuclear weapons. Canada remains committed to implementing Security Council Resolution 1540. We also welcome efforts, such as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. We must remain vigilant to ensure that we never suffer an act of nuclear terrorism.
We welcome the reductions made by the United States and Russia to their nuclear arsenals, particularly the commitments made within the framework of the Moscow Treaty. We urge them to extend the START verification arrangements beyond 2009 and to lock in the gains made with the Moscow Treaty. We also look forward to hearing more about the initiative to multilateralize the INF Treaty.
We welcome the UK's plans to reduce its stockpile from 200 to less than 160 warheads and the UK/Norwegian initiative to convene P5 experts to discuss nuclear disarmament verification mechanisms. We also applaud France's recent decision to reduce its arsenal to fewer than 300 nuclear warheads. That is half of the maximum held during the Cold War. We also look forward to more detailed information on Russian and Chinese nuclear weapons stockpiles.
Measuring disarmament merely in terms of the overall number of weapons eliminated has its limitations. Global stockpiles of weapons and fissile material remain too high, and some states are actually seeking to strengthen their weapons capacity. The DPRK has tested a nuclear device and other states, notably Iran, may be seeking to acquire nuclear weapons. Our preference is the destruction of obsolete weapons rather than their replacement or retention within a stockpile. At a minimum, replacement programs must lead to an overall reduction of nuclear arsenals, lessen the risk of accidents, and obviate the need for renewed nuclear testing.
We welcome the information provided by the Nuclear-Weapon States on their holdings. However, overall there is still a lack of reliable open-source information. We commend those States that provide reports on the implementation of Article VI and encourage all States that have not done so to submit reports. We also invite the Nuclear-Weapon States to provide additional briefings on their nuclear arsenals, policies and doctrines. Such briefings would enhance transparency and build confidence among Nuclear and Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
The 13 Practical Steps adopted at the 2000 NPT Review Conference provide objective benchmarks against which we can measure progress. We warmly congratulate the six states that have ratified the CTBT since the 2007 NPT PrepCom, particularly Colombia, whose ratification reduced to nine the number of ratifications required for the Treaty's entry into force. Ratification by all Nuclear-Weapon States would send a particularly powerful message to the rest of the international community. Another unfulfilled step mandated by the 2000 NPT Review Conference is the negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty. We call on those few states that continue to block consensus in the Conference on Disarmament to support the draft program of work contained in CD document 1840. It is time for the world's forum for negotiating disarmament treaties to get back to work.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
