
Mr. Chairman:
The delegation of Canada extends its best wishes to you on your assumption of the chairmanship of this important Main Committee. We were much impressed by your skill, leadership and active commitment to achievement at last year's PrepCom. Now, we will spare no effort to help you succeed here.
For Canada, the NPT, which we signed in July 1968, is a Treaty of commitment, not convenience. It is at once the foundation of the global nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation regime and the essential basis for peaceful nuclear cooperation under effective international safeguards.
Our collective decision in 1995 to extend the Treaty indefinitely enshrined its values and enhanced its authority and integrity. We seek the full implementation of all of its provisions - for the plain truth is that without disarmament, we will have proliferation. It needs to be emphasized, Mr. Chairman, that the permanence achieved five years ago can in no way be construed as a permit for the indefinite possession by any state party of nuclear weapons. Far from it: permanence in fact confirmed the obligation on every state here to eliminate them.
Fifty years ago, despite having the capability to develop nuclear weapons, Canada renounced nuclear arms. Since then, we have been highly dedicated to work with others to construct a strong international regime to promote both nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman:
The Treaty itself, as well as the principles and objectives we adopted in 1995, recognize that the proliferation of nuclear weapons compounds the risk of nuclear war. The detonation of nuclear explosive devices in May 1998 by India and then Pakistan thus not only violated global norms and greatly complicated global efforts toward nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation; it also raised the spectre of nuclear war in that region. The alarm and determination of the rest of the international community were clear in both Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Canada will continue to resist any movement to legitimize - de facto or de jure - any new nuclear-weapon state. Security Council Resolution 1172 remains for us the foundation of further work in promoting nuclear non-proliferation and confidence-building in South Asia; we urge all States Party to re-dedicate themselves to promoting the complete and comprehensive implementation of its provisions. We also urge all States Party to call upon both India and Pakistan - and Israel and Cuba - to become Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as Non-Nuclear Weapon States. As well, we urge all other States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty without further delay and without conditions.
Mr. Chairman:
For more than half a century, successive Canadian governments have sought the complete elimination of nuclear weapons through the steadfast implementation of unilateral, bilateral and multilateral measures.
Canada and all States Party have a deep and abiding stake in that process together with a binding obligation to pursue and to achieve nuclear disarmament under Article VI. As to the common understanding of that article, we reaffirm that it entails two distinct undertakings by States Party to "pursue negotiations in good faith" first, "on effective measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament," and second, "on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control." The first of these commitments is not conditional upon the achievement of the second. You will recall, Mr. Chairman, that at last year's Prep Com we submitted a working paper on this matter (NPT/CONF.2000/PC.111/10 dated 12 May 1999).
Canada has fully supported the bilateral START process between the United States and the Russian Federation and welcomed, after a seven year-long wait, the ratification of START II by the Duma. We encourage the accelerated negotiation of START III. Further, we encourage the commitment of China, France and the United Kingdom to join an expanded START process.
Canada supports the implementation of irreversible measures to promote enhanced confidence, accountability and transparency in the entire nuclear warhead inventories of active nuclear-weapon-states. Non-strategic nuclear forces are currently not constrained by any negotiated measures. We seek the elimination of the threat posed by tactical nuclear weapons through the early adoption of appropriate measures including accountability and transparency. In the interim, we believe that appropriate measures must be implemented in nuclear weapon doctrines and operations to enhance safety and security at reduced numerical and alert levels.
Canada believes that transparency is crucial in further progress toward nuclear disarmament. To this end, a practical mechanism should be devised within the Conference on Disarmament for exchanges of information and substantive discussion exploring possibilities for further progress in nuclear disarmament through national, bilateral and multilateral initiatives.
The hard-won reduction of nuclear arms over the past 30 years has been based on an intrinsic assumption of strategic stability. This stability has in turn been based on the understanding that strategic defence systems would not be developed or deployed in such a way as to change the basis for nuclear balance. This understanding is codified in the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty. While the treaty can be and has indeed been modified and supplemented over the course of its existence, the preservation of its contribution to strategic stability thus remains vital.
Canada is also dedicated to the promotion of global action on other aspects of the fight against the proliferation of missiles and related systems. In this regard, we favour continuing intensive results-oriented consultations on establishing a standing mechanism in the CD to discuss outer space issues, especially non-weaponization. It would be a substantial and positive achievement if we could, for once, ban weapons from an area -in this case, earth orbit- before they were deployed, rather than always trying to play "catch up" after the fact.
And as noted by my Minister last week, we are also working hard with other countries on the development of new confidence-and-norm-building measures to supplement the work of the Missile Technology Control regime in the battle against missile proliferation. It is, after all, the impact of such proliferation that lies behind much of the recent interest in missile defence systems.
Other key priorities include the entry-into-force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty at the earliest possible time, drawing upon all measures consistent with international law. The international community must affirm the ending of all nuclear explosive testing, in all environments, for all time. Canada signed the CTBT in 1996 and ratified it in 1998. We reaffirm here that, for Canada, the CTBT is in force provisionally, pending its formal entry-into-force. We invite other CTBT States Party to make a similar commitment.
In 1979, Canada proposed an initiative to "suffocate the nuclear arms race." Key to this proposal was - and remains - a universal prohibition on the further production of weapon-usable fissile material. We thus urge States Party to dedicate themselves to the early conclusion of negotiations on a non-discriminatory, universal and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, as initiated within the Conference on Disarmament. Canada believes that fissile material control measures must address both non-proliferation and disarmament objectives. Thus, parallel to FMCT negotiations, appropriate measures to deal with stocks of weapon-usable fissile materials should also be identified and examined. Pending the commencement of negotiations on a FMCT, we urge all five nuclear-weapon states to use the forum of the NPT review process to declare a moratorium on the production of weapon-usable fissile material.
In Canada's plenary statement, Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy warned that the grave risks of nuclear weapons appear to have faded from the radar screen of international attention. Well, now is the time to re-affirm our collective commitment to nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament norms and to re-focus global energy on their fulfilment. This Review Conference is the place to identify and rectify shortcomings, to reinforce the 1995 Principles and to update concrete Objectives and specific goals. Canada remains flexible on format but unwavering on substance. In this context, we are circulating proposals for elements of a programme of action.
Mr. Chairman:
Canada accords high priority to the "strengthened review process" as initiated by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference. We believe that the effective implementation of a well-designed process of review is central to the "permanence with accountability" achieved at that historic meeting. The review process - which involves Preparatory Committees, Review Conferences and any other mechanisms agreed by States parties -should address two basic questions: for what are States parties accountable; and how is that accountability to be exercised? Canada expects this Review Conference to address both questions under item 17 of the Agenda.
As an integral part of the Strengthened Review Process, Canada believes that each Preparatory Committee session should consider and report publicly on key contemporaneous issues pertaining to the functioning and implementation of the provisions of the Treaty. In this context, it may be appropriate to structure a balanced review on an article-by-article basis. We believe each Prep Com session, as a non-negotiating forum, should also summarize its deliberations and forward them to successive sessions and Review Conferences. As well, PrepComs and Review Conferences should consider greater transparency, including increased NGO access and participation and enhanced media awareness. We are circulating proposals for the further strengthening of the review process.
We were here and active when the promise of accountability was made, Mr. Chairman, and we shall be here and active as the promise of accountability is kept.
Thank you.

