Mr. Chairman,
In 1961, at the height of the Cold War, Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker addressed
the issue of nuclear weapons stating, "The explosion of such a diabolical device would be a
brutal offense against humanity for which there can be no justifiable excuse, either in terms of
defence or of simply common sense. No one can deny that continued experimentation of these
devices will ultimately lead to a war measured in megadeaths."
Against this backdrop, Canada has consistently pursued a step-by-step process that halts the
spread of nuclear weapons, reduces existing stockpiles and irreversibly eliminates them. Three
years ago, NPT States Parties agreed on a series of ambitious actions to help realize this
objective. We have made some progress in this regard, but more work remains to be done.
Canada shares the concern expressed in South Africa's earlier statement about the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences that would result from the use of nuclear weapons. Canada
welcomed the March 2013 conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons held in
Oslo, as an opportunity for valuable fact-based discussions on these consequences and on
humanitarian preparedness for a nuclear weapons detonation. We welcome the offer of Mexico
to convene a follow-up conference on this issue.
Canada welcomes the efforts of the Nuclear Weapon States to continue to draw down their
nuclear weapon stockpiles since the 2010 RevCon, including USIRussia efforts to implement
the New START agreement, and the UK's and France's unilateral nuclear reductions as a part
of their updated national defence reviews. We hope that by 2015 there will be further reductions
in all categories of nuclear weapons. To ensure further progress, confidence building measures
and transparency will be key. Canada urges the Nuclear Weapon States to continue their efforts
to implement the 2010 Action Plan. We would welcome further briefings from the Nuclear
Weapon States about the recent Geneva meeting, particularly any concrete outcomes.
Disarmament and transparency is not only the responsibility of the five Nuclear Weapon States.
Canada has been working with its partners in the Non-Proliferationand Disarmament Initiative
to propose practical measures to implement the 2010 Action Plan, including means to address
issues of standard reporting by Nuclear Weapon States and the role of nuclear weapons in
defence doctrines. In an effort to promote greater transparency, Canada has again submitted
two national reports which highlight, among others, our efforts to promote disarmament.
Reporting is something all States Parties can and should do, both Nuclear- and Non-Nuclear
Weapon States, to indicate that NPT commitments are being implemented.
Mr. Chairman,

We have sought, along with the vast majority of the members of the Conference on
Disarmament, to end the long stalemate in that body. Canada very much regrets that the most
recent proposal for a programme of work outlined in CDl1948 was unable to achieve
consensus. A return to work in the CD is essential to ensure progress on nuclear disarmament,
notably on actions 6, 7 and 15. It is particularly regrettable that one non-NPT state continues to
reject any proposal that would start negotiation of a treaty banning the production of fissile

material for nuclear weapons while it continues to not only produce fissile material but has
increased its capacity to do so.
Last fall, faced with the protracted deadlock in the CD, an overwhelming majority of UN General
Assembly members voted in favour of resolution 67/53 that, among other things, created .a
Group of Governmental Experts that will make recommendations on possible aspects that could
contribute to a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. Canada
hopes that States Parties will use the UN Secretary General's request to submit their views by
May 15 for views ensure that their voices are heard on this important issue. A verifiable treaty
addressing fissile material is the only way to ensure that the production of such material for use
in nuclear weapons is permanently halted. In the meantime, Canada calls on all states that have
not done so to declare a moratorium on fissile material production.
Non-Nuclear Weapon States also have a role to play in reducing and securing potential sources
of fissile material, including separated plutonium and highly enriched uranium (HEU). Canada
has spent $450 million to further nuclear security globally since 2002, through the Global
Partnership, including $9 million to shut down the last dedicated plutonium producing reactor in
Russia. Canada's Global Partnership Program has also contributed to the conversion of HEU
fuelled research reactors in Mexico and Vietnam to enable them to use a non-weapons useable
material, low-enriched uranium.
Another important element to achieve the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons is a fully in
force Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). As the widely-condemned and
provocative actions of North Korea illustrated in February, the destabilizing effects of nuclear
weapons testing remain a clear danger to both regional and international peace and security.
Canada continues to play an active role in encouraging further signatures and ratification of the
Treaty with a view to achieving its entry into force as well as its universality. We call on all
States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT as soon as possible and without
condition. Canada also continues to play an active role in advancing the CTBT's robust
verification system, which again displayed its capabilities to detect the signs of the North
Korea's third nuclear test. In October 2012, Canada finalized a contribution arrangement with
the CTBT Organization for the provision of equipment and operational training to strengthen the
Organization's on-site inspection capabilities that will be another valuable measure against
nuclear tests once the Treaty's entry into force is achieved.
Mr. Chair,
Despite the ovenrvhelming demand for nuclear reductions, disarmament does not and cannot
take place in a vacuum. It must be accompanied by strict adherence by ail States Parties to
their non-proliferation obligations under the NPT. As such, the continued non-compliance by
Iran, North Korea and Syria with these obligations jeopardizes the continuation of disarmament
efforts by the Nuclear Weapon States. It is the responsibility of all States Parties to ensure that
progress is made across all three pillars of this Treaty if we hope, one day, to achieve our final
objective.
Thank you.

