Statement by Canada
Cluster 1 - Disarmament
Mr. Chairman
Further progress on nuclear disarmament is essential to assure the continued effectiveness of
the NPT. Unfortunately, our near-consensus on this goal is not matched by a common view
among states on either the pace at which to achieve it, or the best path to follow. The resulting
differences have generated frustration and impeded efforts to build unity on the way ahead for
nuclear disarmament.
Indeed, Canada shares the frustration expressed by many states in recent years regarding the
pace of nuclear disarmament. The status quo is unacceptable to us. At the same time, nuclear
weapons remain fundamental to the security of a significant number of states, as the current
international security environment remains unfavourable to rapid disarmament progress. One
need only look at the accelerating pace of North Korea’s nuclear weapon and ballistic missile
development to grasp the extent and severity of threats currently faced by the international
community. A greater collective effort will be required to defuse underlying international tensions
and create the climate of improved confidence and trust between states necessary to achieve a
world without nuclear weapons. As we work towards this longer-term goal, there are pragmatic
and incremental steps that Canada believes we can take to move forward now.
That is why Canada, Germany and the Netherlands successfully proposed the creation of a
High-Level Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) Expert Preparatory Group last fall at the UN
General Assembly. This Group, which brings together both nuclear weapons possessing states
and non-possessor states, will develop recommendations on substantial elements of a future
non-discriminatory, multilateral and effectively verifiable FMCT. We believe this exercise will
concretely contribute to disarmament by outlining how a treaty can best restrict fissile material
for nuclear weapons. We also expect that the findings of this group will be substantial enough.
We hope that this will compel the Conference on Disarmament to finally find a path forward for
actual FMCT negotiations.
Another resolution adopted in the General Assembly last year which holds promise for
advancing overall nuclear disarmament is the planned Group of Governmental Experts on
Nuclear Disarmament Verification. This initiative complements the International Partnership on
Nuclear Disarmament Verification which is currently developing the required knowledge,
capacity and technical solutions that could verify compliance with future multilateral nuclear
disarmament agreements.
An additional tangible measure to advance disarmament would be entry-into-force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). While we support the de facto norm against
explosive nuclear testing established by the CTBT, we recognize that it is no substitute for the
Treaty’s entry-into-force. Moreover, we deplore the repeated nuclear tests of the DPRK, which
threaten to undermine it. We reiterate our call to all states which have yet to ratify the Treaty, in
particular the remaining Annex II states, to do so without further delay. We have argued that

nuclear disarmament is difficult to advance when there is a dearth of trust and confidence
among states. By remaining outside the CTBT, eight states are feeding uncertainty about their
intentions which is contrary to all our interests.
The provision of assurances to non-nuclear weapon states against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons is another area for further progress. Canada believes that broader application
of assurances would enhance global security. These guarantees should be unconditional and
offered to non-nuclear weapon states which fully respect their NPT obligations.
Individually, each step we have described has either imparted some momentum to the
disarmament process, or could do so. Taken together, they would enhance the confidence and
trust between states which is so noticeably lacking. These initiatives also have the advantage
of being supported by the majority of states. Naturally, these steps will not immediately rid the
world of nuclear weapons. It will take time to build trust, and require both the support of the
majority of states and the committed engagement of nuclear weapon states.
We need to restore our collective purpose in eliminating nuclear weapons. To achieve this,
non-nuclear weapon states will need to maintain a certain degree of patience, while working to
advance the negotiation of an FMCT, bringing the CTBT into force and developing nuclear
disarmament verification capabilities Meanwhile, nuclear weapon states must recognize that
confirming their status in 1995 did not diminish their obligation to disarm. Their actions need to
complement the spirit of the NPT. Inaction, or contrary action, is not what the NPT demands,
nor what the majority of its State Parties expect.
Thank you.

