2018 Preparatory Committee of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation

of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster I: Disarmament
Statement by ·canada
Mr. Chair ,
Canada, like its NATO Al lies, dep ends on nuclear deterrence for its security. Over the last few
yea rs, military and polit ical actions and decla rat ions by the Russian Federation have increased
tensions in Europe and heightened security concerns for NATO. At the same t ime, bell icose
and desta bilizin g nuclear and missile tests by the DPRK have raised alarm among the majority
of states, including Canada and close partners like Japan , the Repub lic of Korea and the Un ited
States.
Under these circumstances . one could assume that Can ada might believe th at nuclear
disarmament efforts are no longer appropriat e. In f act, the op posite is true. W e believe nuclear
d isar mament is as relevant as ever. Further , we be lieve that all Nuclear Weapon States have a
continuing obligation to mak e goo d faith effort s to over come their differences and reduce their
nuclear arsen als, whatever the size of the ir current stockpile.
As leaders hip on nuclear disarmament by the Nucl ear W eapon States has been lacking, it is
hardly surprising that some Non-Nuclea r We apon States, out of frustration with the pace of
progre ss , hav e independent ly sou ght a way forward, for example, by negotiating the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapon s. Whil e recogniz ing the leg itimate grievances of these
coun tr ies. for its part, Canada has sought to pursue initiatives that bring together both Nuclear
Weapon and Non-Nuclear Weapon States to advance our common object ives.
Can ada has sought to support nuclea r disarmame nt in-line with the NPT- This is why we have
made advancing the negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treat y an ongoing priority, and are
curre ntly chairing the High-Leve l FMCT Expert Preparatory Grou p. Canada is depl oying
consid erable resou rces , both hum an and financial , over the course of the Preparatory Group's
work to make a real push for progr ess. We see this as a concerte d year of diplomacy- capping
tw enty five yea rs of Ca nadia n investment on this file .
We are also committed to ensurin g that the views of tl'l'ee ntire intern ational community are
t aken into account in the Preparatory Group's wo rk at every step in the proce ss . In fact, the
incl usive and tra nspar ent charact er of this effort~ and th e iterative path iHollow s between the
Prep aratory Group and the General Assemb ly - is somet hing we view as one of its greate st
strengths . If thi s Group can produ ce a fjnal report which distill s the full range of potential tr eaty
elem ents, as well as t he con sider ations that w ill need to be brought to bea r, it will constitut e a
rea l and mean ingfu l step toward the negoti ation of this tre aty . We believe that all Nucl ear
Weapon States sho uld embr ace such a treaty as a mean s to cap the size of their arsena ls,
wh ich is a logical next step toward s a nuclear weap ons free wo rld. Indeed , we see an FMCT as
vital fo r building trust and confidence between all states on the path to nuclear disarmam enf

.

~

.-

In the curre nt internat ional secu rity context, other steps can and should be taken to improve
tru st and confi dence among states, increase tra nsparency, and bring us closer to our goal. Such
steps could include better sharing of information about their arsenals by Nucle ar Wea pon
States, their provision of robust negative sec urity assurances along wit h further risk reduction
efforts. Progress on the se measur es could help lead to more ambitiou s future disarmament
undertak ings.
Like all !:Jon-Nuclear Wea pon States, Canada expects greater leadership from Nuclear Weap on
States on their commitment under Article V I to keep moving toward nuclear disarmament.
Ultimately , we wish to work with all states to get to global zero.
Thank you.

