Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Costa Rica welcomes your efforts and those of Ambassador Benno Laggner and of your
distinguished teams for introducing this new working document. Let me offer some specific
comments on the text.
My delegation is grateful for the deletion of the qualifications of the pace of disarmament
commitments in paragraphs 8 and 21. Paragraph eight, however, included the phrase "as
perceived by some States," which we request be deleted.
Furthermore, we noticed that the wording of the final sentence of preambular paragraph eight
was changed in terms of the credibility of the three pillars of the Treaty, and not of the Treaty
per se. We find that this wording is creative, but insufficient for this sentence. We ask to return
to the previous formulation that stated "undermines confidence in the Treaty", as the credibility
of the Treaty itself is at stake.
We ust also work on the wording on preambular paragraph 21. First, it eliminated the reference
to there being "many hundreds" of nuclear weapons in high alert, which must be reinserted.
Moreover, the last sentence should be redrafted in full, so that says, “In that context, the
Conference expresses deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use
of nuclear weapons, which, in the interest of the very survival of humanity, should never be used
again under any circumstance.”
In preambular paragraph 12, we request to change the word "promote" for "ensure" the
participation of women and men in the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We need
more, many more women involved in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, and we must
ensure that it is so. We also request reintroduce the phrase "at all levels."
In PP24, we ask that the phrase "indefinite extension of the possession of nuclear weapons" be
replaced with "indefinite possession of nuclear weapons,” since the current wording suggests
that in its first 25 years, the Treaty allowed the possession of nuclear weapons, which is
incorrect.
In preambular paragraph 25, we insist on the need to change the word "importance" and
replace it with "need". In addition, this paragraph eliminated all references to “through
negotiations of a mechanism with clearly defined benchmarks, timelines and a strong system of
verification”. This Conference should require the establishment of clear goals and deadlines and
a strong international verification system to achieve nuclear disarmament. This language should
be reinserted in the next version.
As for PP31, we regret the omission of the reference to new information on the humanitarian
consequences, and ask to reintroduce as it appeared in the original version.
On the operational part, we highlight the important advances in this section that we must
maintain and strengthen.
We are grateful for the rewording of operative paragraph 1 and note, wiith great concern, the
omission of the phrase "under any circumstances". No circumstances justify the use of nuclear
weapons. The only weapon that should be used is international law.

In operative paragraph 4, we note the inclusion of strategic and non-strategic nuclear weapons
in this text, which is an important addition we had requested previously.
However, the level of demand to States possessing nuclear weapons remains low. We see that
in operative paragraphs 4, 5 and , the words “encourages” and “calls upon” continue to be
used, when we had requested that this Review Conference urge nuclear disarmament.
Compliance with the contractual obligations of the NPT is not an option. It is an obligation in
which there is a great sense of urgency.
In operative paragraph 8, regarding risks, we request to add "human error" to the last
sentence, so that it reads "and by the potential vulnerability of command and control systems to
human error and to cyber threats".
Operative paragraph 14 deleted the call to the eight states to ratify the CTBT, and we must
reinsert it, because this Review Conference should call for the CTBT to enter into force.
Operative paragraph 20 requested to change the word "endorse" with "recognize". My
delegation is not, nor will be, able to endorse the step-by-step approach. However, we can
agree for it to say “the Confernce recognizes that some states support the accelerated pursuit of
various intermediate practical building blocks that can be carried out simultaneously.”
However, as was well indicated by the distinguished representative of New Zealand on behalf
of the NAC, we are concerned about the way in which the document ends, as it supports the
accelerated achievement of the "building blocks" as the path leading to nuclear disarmament
and forgets to refer to the need to negotiate a legal framework for the prohibition and
elimination of nuclear weapons.
Therefore, we request to add "while, at the same time, a legal framework that establishes the
prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons is pursued."
Thank you very much.

We appreciate your tireless efforts to present us with this document.
Costa Rica appreciates that the comments made by my delegation have been reflected in the
preambular paragraphs 8, 13, 24 and 25 and operative paragraph 14. These paragraphs should
remain in their entirety in the text.
In the case of preambular paragraph 13, on ensuring the participation of women and men, we
suggest that this paragraph reflect the language of Resolution 69/61.
PP17, again, lowers the bar on the demand on nuclear weapon States to fulfill their nuclear
disarmament obligations. From “urges” we have moved to “reaffirms." This is unacceptable.
This Review Conference should urge concrete actions and stop patting nuclear weapon States
on the back. And I say this because the word “urge” is only used twice throughout the entire
text.
PP 18 is also unacceptable and should be removed. Five years after the adoption of the 2010
Action Plan, it appears that the greatest achievements of this Review Conference are to
legitimize the step-by-step approach, to mistakenly reinterpret Article VI of the Treaty and to
request “reductions” when Article VI is clear in the goal of total elimination of nuclear weapons.
The only option to keep PP18 is to use SSOD1 language in its entirety.
Mr. Chair, Costa Rica cannot support the current wording of the new preambular paragraph 24.
The text has introduced, -at this stage of negotiations- the concept of "nuclear conflagration,"
which completely changes the meaning of this paragraph. What happened to the phrase "use
of nuclear weapons under any circumstances”? Who deleted it? Where did this proposal come
from, which was not heard viva voce in this room? How does speaking of nuclear conflagration
favor this Review Conference? In does not. We present new specific language on this issue that
we hope will be taken into account, as follows:
In that context, the Conference expresses deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, Which, in the interest of the very survival of
humanity, Should never be used again under any circumstance.”
In PP30 and 32, we are greatly disappointed that this Review Conference does not welcome the
humanitarian initiative and the Austrian Pledge, limiting itself to merely noting them. The three
humanitarian conferences are the greatest achievement of the last five years in this topic and
must be duly reflected in the final text. We demand that the word “notes" be changed to
“welcomes."
In paragraph 32, we require that you specify where and when the 33 Heads of State and
Government of Latin America and the Caribbean endorsed the Austrian Pledge. The Austrian
Pledge was endorsed at the Third CELAC Summit, at the level of Heads of State and
Government in Belén, Costa Rica, in January of 2015. Just as we refer rather explicitly to the
cities where P5 meetings have been held, and also to the cities where the humanitarian
conferences have been held, my country and my region wish to have this explicit reference in
the text. We would greatly appreciate it if this were so.

On the operative side, we note some progress and insist on some changes, in order to
strengthen the document.
In operative paragraph 1, we must emphasize our concern over the omission of the phrase
"under any circumstances". We are emphatic that there is no circumstance whatsoever that
could justify the use of nuclear weapons and we believe that this must be reflected in the final
document.
Operative paragraph 3 reinserted the reference to "international stability, peace and security
and based on the principle of undiminished and increased security for all.” This sentence should
be deleted, as it suggests that there must be conditions for initiating nuclear disarmament,
when in fact the nuclear disarmament is conducive to creating those conditions. Additionally, in
this operative paragraph, we believe that we must return to the wording of the previous
versions in terms of time and verification, so that it reads “negotiations of a mechanism with
clearly defined benchmarks, timelines, and a strong system of verification."
In operative paragraph 7, we consider that nuclear weapon States must be required to perform
specific actions, within a specified timeframe, and we believe that the phrase "with a view"
must be eliminated and that the specific timeframe of the next review cycle must be added at
the end of the sentence. Therefore, we suggest the following wording: "to reduce and eliminate
the role and significance of nuclear weapons therein during the next review cycle.” This is
essential because the biggest obstacle to disarmament, and greatest incentive for proliferation,
is the fact that nuclear deterrence continues to be part of security doctrines.
In operative paragraphs 8 and 11, there is reference to unintentional use with the words
"unintentional" and “unintended”. We believe the word "intentional" must be added, as the risk
of intentional use must also be taken into account.
Operative paragraph 12 neglects to include the non-nuclear weapon-States that have nuclear
weapons in their security doctrines, so that, inter alia, they must (i) report the number, type
and status of nuclear weapons their territory; (ii) cease any involvement in nuclear planning or
targetting; (iii) put an end to the practice of hosting nuclear weapons their territory during the
next review cycle; (iv) eliminte nuclear weapons from their security doctrines during the next
review cycle. Moreover, we believe that the conference should call on all States that do not
possess nuclear weapons to prohibit any transit of nuclear weapons through their airspace or
territorial waters.
With regard to operative paragraph 19, we believe that the imperative to pursue negotiations
on effective measures is not properly articulated. This paragraph should be maintained and
strengthened, particularly the mention of legal provisions for the achievement and
maintenance of a nuclear weapons-free world.
Furthermore, the last sentence of paragraph 19 must be eliminated, or at least moved to
another part of the document in a different section.
Finally, Mr President, to reach a commitment to arrive to an outcome document cannot mean
the perpetuation of the status quo. The 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences were a
commitment. This Review Conference must be a genuine turning point.
Thank you.
