Egypt
Statement by

H.E. Ambassador Dr. Sameh AboulEnein
Deputy Assistant Minister for Disarmament Affairs of
The Arab Republic of Egypt
Before
The Second Session of the
Preparatory Committee to the 2015
NPT Review Conference
Cluster I specific issue:

Nuclear Disarmament

Geneva, 25 April 2013

Check against delivery

Egypt's Statement
Before the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
For the 2015 NPT Review Co nference
Gencva,- 25 April 2013
"Cluster I issues" (Nuclear Disarmament)

Mr. Chairman,
At the beginning, I would like to extend my congratulations to you on your
appointment as Chairman to this second session of the Preparatory Committee for
the 2015 NPT Review Conference. We look forward to working with you in order
to achieve the ultimate goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world. In this regard, nuclear
disarmament, as the first pillar of the Treaty, remains one of Egypt's highest
priorities, a priority which we have constantly promoted in all international
disarmament fora.
Egypt associates itself with the working papers on nuclear disarmament submitted
to this session by theNon-Aligned Movement and New Agenda Coalition. Indeed,
these working papers make several important suggestions that must be considered
seriously. Such ideas as the immediate commencement of serious negotiations to
develop a plan to achieve an overall reduction of the global stockpile of nuclear
weapons of all kinds, and to continue to reduce the role of nuclear weapons and
their importance in military and security policies, constitute the building blocks of
a world free of nuclear weapons.
We stress our concern at the threat to humanity posed by the continued existence of
nuclear weapons, and reaffirm that the total elimination of nuclear weapons, which
represents the primary objective of the NPT, is the only guarantee against the use
or threat of use of such weapons. This objective is dependent upon the full
implementatioh by the riuclear-weapon States of their unequivocal commitment
made in 2000 under Article VI and the achievement of universal adherence to the
Treaty. International peace and security can never be attained with the existence of
such weapons and the continuing vitality of our Treaty depends on bringing about a
permanent end to all nuclear weapons as required by the NPT.
Mr Chairman,

J

For non-nuclear weapon States (NNWS), theNPT is firmly anchored on the
premise that the achievement of nuclear disarmament is the ultimate objective.
Based on that commitment, the NNWS have renounced the military nuclear option.
Both nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states reaffirmed the
inalienable right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear applications.
~

Moreover, the reaffirmation of the commitment to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons was fundamental to the decision, which was adopted without a vote, to
indefinitely extend the NPT in 1995.
Egypt recalls that the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences, respectively, agreed on
13 practical steps and on an action plan on nuclear disarmament which includes
concrete steps for the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Accordingly, Egypt
strongly calls for prompt and full implementation of Article VI of the Treaty along
with the 2000 and 2010 outcomes to advance systematically and progressively
towards a nuclear-weapon-free world.
Whilst we aclmowledge that modest progress has been made, such as the START
treaty that was signed two years ago between the United States and the Russian
Federation, much in the field of nuclear disarmament has yet to be realised.
The negotiation of a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons within a specified time frame ending in 2025, including a Nuclear
Weapons Convention, is necessary and should commence without any further
delay. Egypt reaffirms the importance of the application of the principles of
transparency, verifiability and ineversibility by the nuclear weapon States in all
measures relating to nuclear disarmament. Towards this end, the new Agenda
Coalition, which Egypt has the honour to be a member of, presented a working
paper to the first prepcom on the application of verifiability in nuclear
disarmament. It has also presented a working paper to this prep com on
transparency in nuclear disarmament.
In addition, the Conference on Disarmament should agree on a balanced and
comprehensive programme of wode that should include the three actions related to
the CD in the 2010 Action Plan. This includes the immediate commencement of
negotiations on a verifiable multilateral treaty bmming the production of fissile
materials for nuclem路 weapons and other explosive devices on the basis of
document CDI1299 (the Shannon report) and the mandate contained therein while
ensuring both nuclem路 disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives. This
necessitates the inclusion of dealing with stockpiles of weapon-usable materials.
We also remain deeply concerned by the strategic doctrines of nuclear-weapon
States that continue to rely upon and set out the rationales for the use of nuclear
weapons, thereby undermining previous commitments made under the NPT. As
one NGO ~ Reaching Critical Will - has aptly put it, the nuclear doctrines of the
nuclear-weapon States are "StiU assuring destruction forever". It is equally a matter
of serious concern and is unacceptable that some 30 non-nuclear weapon States
pmiy to the Treaty rely upon nuclear weapons for their security through defense
arrangements with their nuclear-weapon State sponsors.
i

Egypt emphasizes, in particular, the prime importance of and the urgent rieed fot
full and prompt implementation of the commitments by all nUclear-weapon States
under action (5) of the 2010 Review Conference "action plan on nuclear
disarmament". In this context, we further recall that nuclear-weapon States
committed to accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear
disarmament.
Mr Chairman,
We are informed that the nUclear-weapon States have been engaged in discussions
on "definitions" regarding nuclear weapons, it should be noted that though
welcome such a step clearly is insufficient and inadequate. Were the non-nuclearweapon States to engage in discussions on definitions of non-proliferation, that
would be characterized as impractical and time wasting.
Moreover, Egypt calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to submit comprehensive
substantive reports about their undertakings under action (5) of the 2010 Review
Conference to the Preparatory Committee in 2014, in order to enable the 2015
Review Conference to take stock and consider the next steps for the full
implementation of article VI of the Treaty in realization of the objective of the total
elimination of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt recalls that the 2010 Review Conference reaffirmed and recognized the
legitimate interest of all non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty in
receiving unequivocal and legally binding security assurances, from the nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, as this is in their
security interest and is a legitimate right.
Accordingly, we are of the view that pending the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, nuclear-weapon States must refrain from the threat or use of nuclear
weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty. Egypt
reiterates that efforts to conclude a universal, unconditional and legally binding
instrument on security assurances to all non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Treaty should be pursued as a matter of priority and should be materialized without
further delay. Furthermore, Egypt calls upon those nuclear-weapon States that have
not as yet signed on to the relevant Protocols of existing nuclear-weapon-free zone
treaties, to do so unequivocally and without further delay.
Mr. Chairman,

It is important to note that thi s session of the Preparatory Committee, and indeed
the review cycle for the 2015 NPT Conference, comes with continued high
expectations from peoples around the world to move rapidly towards total nuclear
disarmament, thereby enhancing global peace and security.

Egypt together with more than 70 States delivered a statement on the humanitarian
impact of nuclear weapons. This statement, which is gaining the world's attention
makes clear the unacceptable consequences of any nuclear detonation, whether by
design, miscalculation or accident. Given that the only guarantee that nuclear
weapons are never to be used again is their total elimination, the continued
existence of nuclear weapons represents a threat to humanity. We have repeatedly
heard that the nuclear weapon States are well aware of the danger to humanity, yet
their lack of action towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons, and thus the
elimination of the threat to humanity, is lacking. Egypt therefore urges all NPT
States Parties to give serious consideration to the issues raised in thi s joint
statement.
Indeed, 2013 is posed to be seminal in carrying forward the discussion on nuclear
disarmament. Several multilateral fora are being held during this year to deal with
this issue. Last month some 127 States and several United Nations agencies
attended the Conference on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, held in
Oslo in early March. It is not at all surprising that the Oslo conference concluded
that the historical experience from the use and testing of nuclear weapons has
demonstrated the devastating immediate and long-term effects of such weapons;
and that while political circumstances have changed, the destructive potential of
nuclear weapons remains. Unfortunately, the nuclear-weapon States chose not to
attend this important conference which is highly regrettable - hopefully, these
States will attend the next such conference which shall be hosted by Mexico.
Furthermore, The UN General Assembly recently adopted a resolution that called
for an Open-Ended Working Group to address nuclear disarmament. This exercise
provides a useful opportunity to consider practical and concrete steps for the
elimination of nuclear weapons. It is highly regrettable that the nuclear-weapon
States have chosen not to participate in the deliberations of this working group. The
organizations session of the group was already held路 in Geneva, and we look
forward to the substantive sessions during the period from May-August. Egypt will
be participating very actively in that working group and we look forward for an
equal positive participation fr0111 all States, including nuclear weapon States.
The High Level Meeting on Nuclear Disarmament that will be held in September
of this year, in accordance to the UN General Assembly resol ution adopted during
the 6ih GA Session, represents an opportunity to take stock of what is needed to
o

achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. We urge all States to participate in that
HLM at the highest level, and in particular we urge the nuclear weapon States to
paJiicipate very constructively in that meeting.
In this context, Egypt 路 reiterates its full support to the NAM commitment to
vigorously pursue the following priorities leading to the Review Conference in
2015, in full cooperation with all States PaJiies to the Treaty:
1. Realizing the full and prompt implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments by nuclear weapon States, aiming at the total elimination of
nuclear weapons by 2025.
2. Pursuing continued focused and dedicated effolis to realize at the earliest
possible time the universality of the Treaty as a key requirement for its
effectiveness, and the global realization of its objectives.
3. Prompt commencement of negotiations on a Nuclear Weapons Convention,
the route to realizing a world free from nuclear weapons by the year 2025 .
4. Commencement of negotiations on a legally binding instrument to provide
non nuclear weapon States with global, unconditional security assurances
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, pending the realization of
the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
5. Reaffirmation of the inalienable right of non nuclear weapon States PaJiies to
the Treaty to pursue their national choices in the area of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, including their right for nuclear fuel cycle, without undue
restrictions that would contradict with Article IV ofthe Treaty.
6. Reaffirmation that voluntary arrangements and confidence building measures
undertaken by States Parties should, by no means, be seen as to tum into
legal obligations, that would affect the balanced commitments and
obligations of the States PaJiy in accordance with the Treaty.
Finally, let emphasize the role of non-governmental organizations and civil society
in supporting nuclear disarmament is much appreciated. They have prepared
several very informative and useful repOlis, which can serve as a model for
reporting by the nuclear-weapon States.
Mr. Chairman, as a non-nuclear-weapon State which is paJiy to the NPT and to the
African nuc1ear-weapon-free zone treaty, Egypt urges all NPT States to match
words with actions and work to achieve a world without nuclear weapons.

****
i

