Statement of Egypt
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I Issues

Mr. Chairman,
1. The delegation of Egypt associates itself with the statements made by the delegations of
Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and Ireland on behalf of the New Agenda
Coalition.
Mr. Chairman,
2. As obviously reflected by the negotiation records, the NPT was basically formulated to bring
about the goal of nuclear disarmament while promoting at the same time non-proliferation. It
was logical to identify the mutually reinforcing relationship between non-proliferation and
nuclear disarmament. The Treaty had to make sure that horizontal proliferation is effectively
stopped, while those who have already developed nuclear weapons commit to the progressive
and un-delayed elimination of their arsenals in fulfillment of the objective of the total elimination
of nuclear weapons within a timeframe of 25 years, the original duration of the Treaty.
3. The original specification of a limited duration of 25 years for the Treaty only reflects the
nature of this deal, as much as it reflects the transitional nature of the NPT with regard to nuclear
disarmament. Neither the letter nor spirit of the Treaty, nor States which have joined it as NonNuclear-Weapons-States, expected or accepted at any stage the continued possession of few
States of nuclear weapons indefinitely. This would have undermined the basic foundations of the
principle of equality among States and the already identified highest priority of nuclear
disarmament the Treaty seeks to materialize.
4. Against this background, and after the continued efforts at each and every Review Conference
to date to seek progress in nuclear disarmament, the Review Conference next year will take place
45 years after the entry into force of the NPT, and 20 years after its indefinite extension and just
five years since the 2010 outcome put forward a plan of action to be pursued in this regard.
Regrettably, even at this point in history, some 17 thousand nuclear weapons continue to exist
and we are nowhere near a systematic practical process towards nuclear disarmament within a
specified timeframe. This should not go on forever.
5. Article VI, remains far from realized, although it has been very encouraging that the future
looking outcome document of the 2010 Review Conference identified a Nuclear Weapons
Convention as a route to realizing this objective. It has also been equally encouraging that the

humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons have been brought to the forefront in that
document for the first time. The effort culminating in the Nayarit Conference, hosted by Mexico,
last February, and attended by 146 States –while boycotted by the Nuclear-Weapon-States,
revealed the extent of disappointment of the international community with the continued
existence of nuclear weapons, confirmed that the arguments in defense of nuclear weapons are
contrary to human dignity and reflected that the time has come to initiate a diplomatic process
within a given timeframe to rid the world of the inacceptable threat represented in the continued
existence of nuclear weapons.
6. But where do we stand on this within the NPT? It is clear we have article VI of the Treaty
which remains far from implemented. We also have the Decision on “Principles and Objectives
of Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament” adopted at the indefinite extension of the Treaty
in 1995, which identified the Universality of the Treaty as an urgent priority, and put forward a
programme of action that has not been implemented as well agreed restrictions on new supply
arrangements for nuclear material and equipment which have not been observed.
7. In 2000, the 13 practical steps represented a serious promise to advance nuclear disarmament,
yet little progress has been witnessed in the the implementation of these steps to date.
Mr. Chairman,
8. The time has come for Nuclear-Weapon-States to change course, if the NPT is to continue to
embrace the vision of nuclear disarmament and the balance required between the three pillars of
the Treaty. Their efforts cannot be solely dedicated to their own arsenals but also to existing
arsenals in States non-members of the Treaty, in particular in the Middle East, as clearly
envisioned in the 1995 Resolution of the Middle East.
9. One year remains before the 2015 Review Conference, and if political commitment exists, a
lot can be achieved in one year. This year will stand to witness if there exists, or existed at any
time, a true intention to dismantle nuclear arsenals and to work effectively to bring non-members
of the Treaty, particularly in the Middle East, into its membership as Non-Nuclear-WeaponStates. This year will show if the value of nuclear deterrence and cooperation with non-members
will continue to outweigh in their importance that of the future of the Treaty.
10. These are times which require leadership and courage but the reward is valuable, namely to
save the Treaty from becoming obsolete and to make sure it continues to address the interests of
its collective membership rather than those of a few States. An NPT which will become a Treaty
to indefinitely preserve the acquisition of nuclear weapons by a few States, is neither one that
can survive the test the time, nor is it one which will achieve the objectives which its
overwhelming membership sought to support. A successful 2015 will undoubtedly depend on
progress in nuclear disarmament that we all encourage and anticipate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman

