PERMANENT MISSION OF FINLAND TO THE UNITED NATIONS
866 UN PLAZA, SUITE 222, NEW YORK, NY 10017 - TEL. 1-212-355-2100 - FAX 1-212-759-6156

2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Main Committee I

Statement by
Mr. Klaus Korhonen
Ambassador for Arms Control
Head of Delegation
Finland

New York, 1 May 2015

(check against delivery)

•

Thank you Mr Chairman,
Let me first congratulate you on assuming the important task as Chair of the Main Committee 1.
You have the full support of this delegation.
Finland fully aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union.
In 2010 NPT Final Document and Action Plan, all States Parties committed to pursue policies
towards nuclear disarmament and the objective of achieving a world without nuclear weapons.
Now is the time to reflect where we are with these commitments.
The Nordic countries - Sweden, Finland, Norway, Denmark and Iceland joined forces to provide
a common working paper for the Cluster 1. The working paper includes recommendations for
the Review Conference in nuclear disarmament, especially regarding the rule of law,
humanitarian perspective, the need for effective disarmament, de-alerting and reducing the role
of nuclear weapons in military doctrines.
We do not believe that anyone's security could be based on nuclear or any other weapons of
mass destruction. Working towards a world free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction is a responsibility of all nations. We also recognize that eliminating nuclear weapons
is only possible through substantive and constructive engagement with those states that
possess nuclear weapons.
We certainly welcome the efforts made by the Nuclear Weapon States to reduce their nuclear
arsenals. The New START Treaty is an example of bilateral disarmament efforts between the US
and Russia. We acknowledge that since the Cold War, the nuclear arsenals of these two have
been drastically reduced. However, they still possess thousands of nuclear weapons and it is
vitally important to continue efforts in further and deeper cuts in their nuclear arsenals.
In addition to addressing strategic weapons, reductions in non-strategic nuclear arsenals are
needed and they should be brought under a legally binding and verifiable international system.
First steps toward a verifiable international system should include further transparency and
information exchanges, as well as other confidence building measures.
For the trust in the NPT regime, it is of great importance that the nuclear-weapon States fully
implement their obligations under the Article VI of the Treaty and engage in good faith
negotiations on further nuclear disarmament steps.

We appreciate the coordination, further transparency and confidence building among the NPT
nuclear weapon states through the PS process and their efforts in producing a nuclear
disarmament glossary. We welcome initiatives such as the International Partnership for Nuclear
Disarmament as an important confidence building measure among the major nuclear weapon
states and a number of non-nuclear weapon states.
Mr Chairman,
Unfortunately the pace of nuclear disarmament has recently slowed down. At the same time the
urgency of nuclear disarmament is increasing as has been highlighted by the three conferences
on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. Finland participated in all of these conferences.
The painful memory from 70-years ago of Hiroshima and Nagasaki reminds us of the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons use. The humanitarian initiative
reflects the genuine concerns of citizens all over the world that as long as those weapons exist
there is a real threat of a terrible catastrophe with immeasurable human and humanitarian costs.
For us the NPT should be in the center of this debate as the humanitarian underpinning is a
fundamental principle of the Treaty. We will continue working in order to find more common
ground around this issue. For this end we decided to join both of the two statements on the
humanitarian consequences. We consider them complementary and mutually reinforcing.
According to our account. as many as 182 countries in this Conference joined the collective two
statements, which emphasize the humanitarian perspective in discussion on nuclear
disarmament Three countries signed up to both, Finland being one of them. As there is no
conflict between these statements, perhaps we could consider combining them in the future?
This would be a manifestation of the inclusive approach that we all support Combining the two
statements would be an effective way to increase unity in the group of states around the
humanitarian argument
Mr Chairman,
The stalemate in the Conference on Disarmament remains a serious concern. To make the CD a
modern negotiation forum, we should review its working methods, including its enlargement.
and participation of civil society.

As an indispensable step towards nuclear disarmament Finland attaches great importance in
prompt launch of negotiations of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). We are pleased to
have been able to contribute to the work of the Group of Governmental Experts. We are
convinced that the GGE consensus report will lay the ground for future efforts on the FMCT.

As one of the "Friends of the CTBT" Finland underlines the urgency of the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Civil society should be an integral part of disarmament and non-proliferation discussions in all
forums. Finland has encouraged and supported participation of civil society in the disarmament
fora, and has once again a civil society representative as part of our national delegation here in
the NPT Review Conference.
Mr Chairman,
Let me assure you that the Finnish delegation will work towards a consensus outcome of the
NPT Review Conference. The frustration on slow progress is not a reason to stop working. The
2010 Action Plan is a good basis and we should work together to elaborate further measures
and disarmament commitments in order to guarantee continued progress to achieve the goals
of the NPT.
I thank you Mr Chairman

