
Mr. Chairman,
France adheres to the statement delivered on this cluster on behalf of the European Union.
1/ France fully complies with Article VI of the NPT, in a progressive and pragmatic
approach, which is the only realistic way to promote regional and international stability,
based on the principle of undiminished security for all.
France shares the ultimate goal of totally eliminating nuclear weapons, when the strategic
context allows. In this regard, France has taken concrete and significant steps.
France never participated in the nuclear arms race. It has always maintained its nuclear
arsenal at the lowest possible level, in line with the strategic context, according to the
principle of strict sufficiency.
Since the end of the Cold War, my country has taken considerable unilateral measures:
detargeting, irreversible dismantling of the facilities for the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons, total dismantlement of the ground-to-ground component of our deterrence,
reduction of airborne and submarine components by one third, irreversible dismantling of the
nuclear test site in the Pacific and the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT). These significant steps demonstrate our genuine and action-oriented
commitment to nuclear disarmament.

~5~

Such steps could be taken in the aftermath of the Cold War, as the international strategic
context enabled restoring confidence and reducing tensions.
France has shown transparency by declaring the composition of its nuclear arsenal which is
less than 300 warheads in total: (4 nuclear-submarines with ballistic missiles, three sets of 16
submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBM), and 54 airborne missiles.) The French
deterrent is strictly defensive. Its sole aim is to protect our vital interests, in extreme
circumstances of self-defence, a right enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
France also mobilizes significant technical resources and implements strict, rigorous and
effective procedures to guarantee nuclear weapons security, within the framework of the
“governmental control” mechanism.

Mr. Chairman,
2/ It would be dangerous to think that it is possible to disconnect nuclear disarmament
from the security context, currently marked by growing regional tensions and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
There are no shortcuts on the way to nuclear disarmament.
The prohibition approach could divide the disarmament community, and generate more
frustration rather than progress in nuclear disarmament.
3/ France will continue its assertive and determined action towards nuclear
disarmament, on the basis of consensus and within the framework of the legitimate
disarmament fora.
As indicated Dr. Lassina Zerbo, the Executive Secretary of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty Organization, the early entry into force of the CTBT is a priority. France calls on
all States who have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT. We welcome the adoption of
United Nations Security Council Resolution 2310, co-sponsored by France. This resolution
endorses the national moratoria declared by the five nuclear-weapon States and reaffirms that
their Simulation programmes are fully compliant with the provisions of the CTBT. The
effectiveness of the CTBTO international monitoring system (IMS) is unanimously
recognized.
The negotiation, at the Conference on Disarmament and on the basis of the Shannon Mandate,
of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT) for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive
devices is also an essential and irreplaceable step towards a world without nuclear weapons,
when conditions are met. An FMCT would limit the quantitative development of nuclear
arsenals. France will substantially contribute to the High Level FMCT Expert Preparatory
Group, established by resolution 71/259, which it supported.

~6~

Discussions on the technical challenges of nuclear disarmament verification between nuclearweapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States foster common understanding and increase
trust. France participates actively in the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament
Verification (IPNDV) and supported the UNGA Resolution 71/67. This resolution establishes,
from 2018, a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) to examine the role of verification on
nuclear disarmament. We hope that many States will support these promising processes.
As the United States and Russia still possess nearly 90% of the world’s nuclear arsenals they
should pursue their reduction efforts following the expiry of the New Start Treaty in 2021.

Mr. Chairman,
Let me finish by reiterating that progress towards nuclear disarmament can only be reached
through a collective approach, based on consensus and in full recognition of each State’s
security concerns. France will work towards the 2020 Review Conference accordingly.
Thank you for your attention./.

