•I

Permanent Mission
of Germany
to the United Nations
New York

Statement by

Ambassador Michael Biontino
Permanent Representative of Germany to the Conference
on Disarmament

Mr President,
First of all, I align myself with the statement by the European
Union and with the positions of the NPDI.
As we stated in the general debate, for Germany the 2010
Action Plan remains a valid roadmap for the future.
With regard to nuclear disarmament, assessments diverge on
how much progress has been achieved. While the numbers of
global stockpiles have gone down over the last couple of years,
there are still some 16,000 nuclear weapons, of which around
8000 are operational.
Against this backdrop, Germany welcomes the ongoing
implementation of the New START Treaty and the unilateral
disarmament steps taken by some of the Nuclear-Weapon
States. We call upon the United States of America and the
Russian Federation to continue their bilateral efforts to
constructively engage with each other in order to achieve
further reductions. After all, this is precisely what is required
under Article VI of the NPT according to the reading of this
Article by the International Court of Justice in its 1996
Advisory Opinion.
Germany greatly appreciates the fact that the offer made by
President Obama in Berlin two years ago to start a new
disarmament round with Russia prior to the complete
implementation of New START in 2018 is still on the table. It
is an opportunity which must not be lost if progress is to be
made towards the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons, to
which Germany remains strongly committed. We therefore
call upon Russia to respond constructively to President
Obama' s initiative.
The 2010-Action Plan placed emphasis on transparency, with
good reason. Germany welcomes the timely submission of the
reports of the PS in this context. Under the Action Plan,

reporting is an obligation incumbent on all NPT Member
States. However, it is hard to deny that the P5 have a
particular responsibility to report on their stocks, without
prejudice to national security. In the absence of concrete
figures, it is almost impossible to ascertain whether headway
is being made or to confirm that nuclear stockpiles are not
expanding. This Conference should thus reiterate the crucial
importance of transparency. The Standard Reporting Forms
developed by the NPDI should be revisited to this end. In this
context, Germany welcomes the US launch of an International
Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification.
In the NPT community, many partners are wondering whether
the step-by-step-approach is still valid. Some ask whether it
might not be more appropriate to accelerate the process
towards a world free of nuclear weapons by already starting
negotiations on a nuclear weapon ban or convention today.
Germany does not share this view.
As Sam Nunn, William Perry, Henry Kissinger and George
Shultz put it succinctly: "A world without nuclear weapons
will not simply be today's world minus nuclear weapons." In
other words, effective and verifiable nuclear disarmament
does not take place in a vacuum, but in a concrete security and
political context. For the time being, nuclear weapons are still
assigned a role in military doctrines. This also applies to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, of which Germany is a
member.
The 2010 NPT Action Plan is based on a gradual approach. Its
Action 5 lists important steps which should be taken, such as a
further reduction of the role of nuclear weapons in military
doctrines and the issue of de-alerting. All of these measures
presuppose trust between partners and a cooperative setting
based on reciprocity. After the illegal annexation of Crimea by

Russia and in the course of the Ukraine crisis, considerable
trust has been lost. This is also true with regard to the socalled Negative Security Assurances, which suffered a heavy
blow after the breach of the Budapest Memorandum, which
guaranteed the territorial integrity of Ukraine. We are also
concerned about repeated statements by Russian officials
implying a possible use of nuclear weapons. Such statements
do not help rebuild trust! In the present, difficult climate, it is
also of paramount importance that disarmament and nonproliferation commitments under existing treaties are
honoured, including the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, which is a crucial element of Euro-Atlantic
security. In this connection, Germany calls on Russia to
preserve the viability of the INF Treaty by ensuring full
compliance.
Against this sobering backdrop, this Conference should help
rebuild trust in the implementation of the NPT Action Plan
with its detailed proposals for all three pillars. From
Germany's perspective, this would also specifically help
address the concerns about the catastrophic humanitarian
impact of nuclear weapons' detonations expressed during the
three international conferences on this issue. The upcoming
commemorations of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki are stem reminders of why this issue is so important.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The interpretation of Article VI has been a topic of intense
debate, particularly during the current review cycle. Germany
interprets the Article as a duty to engage with a view to
achieving concrete and verifiable results. Article VI is thus
much more than just an appeal. Furthermore, the obligations
of all NPT parties under Article VI are at least partially spelled

out in Consensus Documents agreed at Review Conferences.
Some of these obligations require further negotiation and
consequently cannot be achieved unilaterally. Others, such as
the ratification of the CTBT, can be brought about without the
corresponding engagement of other States. It is highly
regrettable that the CTBT has not yet entered into force in
spite of the overwhelming support for this goal from both the
2000 and 2010 Review Conferences. The entry into force of
the CTBT would be in the security interest of all states. In the
21st century, there is no place for nuclear testing! Germany
welcomes the fact that the International Monitoring System
has already proven its effectiveness by detecting nuclear tests.
States Signatories must increase the political will and provide
adequate resources to complete the verification regime.
Germany is proud to be the third largest contributor to the
important work of the CTBTO.
It is also highly regrettable that, in spite of the consensus
achieved at NPT Review Conferences, negotiations on a
Treaty banning the production of fissile material for use in
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices have not
yet begun. The Group of Governmental Experts, of which
Germany is proud to have been a member, has done a large
amount of important groundwork to pave the way for these
negotiations, which should begin as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we are looking forward to an intense and honest
debate about the implementation of the 2010 Action Plan on
nuclear disarmament. As no document is perfect, Germany is
open to discussing ideas on how to supplement or update it
where necessary.
Thank you.

