Statement by Ambassador Dr. György Molnár
Director General for Security Policy and Non-proliferation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hungary
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I issues – Nuclear disarmament
May 2, 2014

Mr Chairman,
Since this is the first time Hungary takes the floor during the Third Session of the Preparatory
Committee let me begin by warmly congratulating you on your election and assuring you of
our full support. Hungary aligns itself with the statements of the European Union, the
Statement of the Vienna Group of 10 delivered by Australia and the Statement on the
Importance of Disarmament and Non-proliferation Education delivered by Japan.
Mr. Chairman,
Hungary attaches outstanding importance to preserving the balance between the three pillars
of the NPT. As far as nuclear disarmament is concerned we fully share the long-term goal of
a world free of nuclear weapons. We believe in a realistic and feasible approach towards
achieving this goal. Hungary is of the view that the elimination of nuclear weapons is not a
single act but has to be a step-by-step, comprehensive process, which fully engages the
nuclear weapon states, as well and, at the same time, preserves the integrity of the NPT. The
generally recognized devastating humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons has to be
addressed in this fashion as well.
Mr. Chairman,
While Hungary is not a nuclear weapon state, we nevertheless do our utmost to contribute to
the efforts aimed at achieving our common goal, nuclear disarmament in accordance with
Article VI of the NPT, through concrete and practical steps which, at the same time, also
promote international security and stability. Due to the time constraints, I confine myself to
referring only to a few of them.
The Conference on Disarmament is a body that Hungary continues to hold in high regard as
one of the major multilateral fora in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, with the
special task of negotiating disarmament treaties. We are convinced that the reasons for the
stalemate in the CD are not of procedural, but rather of political nature, and our collective
efforts are needed to revitalize this important piece of the disarmament machinery. We cannot
give up on the CD.
The very first step towards a working Conference would be the adoption of a programme of
work, in line with the Action Plan of the 2010 Review Conference. This should remain the
focus of successive presidencies. The recently established informal Working Group can help
the presidencies in their efforts by making the drafting of a programme of work a truly
collective endeavour. In our view, this means a Programme of work that allows for the
beginning of negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut off Treaty (FMCT).

We are convinced that a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices would be a significant contribution to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation and, at the same time, would also contribute to the implementation of
Article VI of the NPT. By verifiably banning the production of fissile materials, it would limit
the amount of direct-use materials, which may be accessible to non-state actors for building
improvised nuclear explosive devices; it could also significantly reduce the likelihood of these
materials being used in terrorist acts. Therefore the FMCT would have both non-proliferation
and disarmament components not only complementing but also strengthening the NPT.
As one of the countries having been selected to appoint an expert on the group, Hungary
participates in the wok of the GGE with “ambitious realism”. We expect the GGE to lay the
groundwork for an eventual FMCT by providing the international community with a full
picture of the complexity of the issue and a detailed analysis of the available options.
Mr. Chairman,
In our view another important building block still missing from the legal architecture of
nuclear disarmament, is the comprehensive ban on nuclear tests. Given the number of States
Signatories, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) represents a nearly universal
norm. Nevertheless, after almost two decades of its adoption, the entry-into-force of the
Treaty remains elusive. This motivated us to undertake the duties of Article XIV coordinator,
together with Indonesia, between 2013 and 2015. Our planned outreach activities to facilitate
the entry into force of the Treaty are described in the Action Plan of the Coordinators made
public last December.
To ensure an innovative and focused approach in advancing the CTBT’s ratification, a group
comprising of eminent personalities and internationally recognized experts was launched in
the margins of last year’s Article XIV Conference. Through their expertise, experience and
political standing, this Group of Eminent Persons (GEM) supports and complements efforts to
promote the Treaty’s entry into force as well as reinvigorate international endeavors to
achieve this goal. We are confident that the endeavors of the GEM will contribute to a
reinforced dialogue with important stakeholders in the remaining Annex II countries.
Therefore Hungary is ready to host the next meeting of the Group in Budapest later this year.
Mr. Chairman,
As the end of the current review cycle of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) is
fast approaching, in conclusion I wish to reiterate the firm commitment of Hungary to the
Treaty in general, and to the fulfilment of the objectives of the Action Plan adopted by the
2010 Review Conference in particular.

