Please check against delivery

Statement by
Ms. Grata Endah Werdaningtyas
Director of International Security and Disarmament
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia

at the Second Session of The Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster 1: non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, disarmament
and international peace and security

Geneva, 26 April 2018

Mr. Chairman,

Indonesia associates itself with the statement on Cluster 1 issues made earlier by the
Group of Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT and its relevant working
papers.
Indonesia has been a strong advocate of a balanced progress in all three pillars of
upon which the Treaty is founded. However, it is disheartening to follow that the
volatility in global security environment continues to be the reason for nuclear-weapon
states to cling to their weapons of mass destruction.
Indonesia is gravely concerned that the real threat of nuclear arms race re-emerges
and, as the result, nuclear disarmament remains elusive. We believe, that this situation
is a dire threat against humanity, a violation of international humanitarian law and the
UN Charter.
Indonesia strongly believes that multilateralism is the best way to sustainably achieve
nuclear disarmament and address international security issues.
It is in this believe that Indonesia supports the Treaty on the Prohibitions of Nuclear
Weapons on July 7th , 2017. lt is unfortunate that nuclear weapons States and some
other states still express their unwillingness to welcome and join the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,

The fulfilment of disarmament obligations under Article VI of the Treaty does not show
any promising progress so far. Nuclear weapon states have not fully and systematic
implemented the 13 practical steps in the manner that was agreed to at the 2000
Review Conference.
Indonesia, therefore, calls for the full and urgent implementation of the action plans
adopted at the 2010 NPT Review Conference on nuclear disarmament, the 1995
decision on Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,
the 13 practical steps agreed to in 2000, as well as the fulfilment of obligation under
Article VI of the Treaty.

Mr. Chairman ,

Indonesia welcomes the initiatives by nuclear weapon states on disarmament through
unilateral, bilateral or regional arrangements. However, to be credible they are need
to be verifiable and transparent.
ln this regard, we join other state parties to reiterate that nuclear disarmament must
be complete, verifiable and rrreversible. To this end, we reaffirm the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Indonesia has full confidence on IAEA, as a

credible and capable organization in safeguarding nuclear disarmament, for their
impartiality and professionalism.

Mr. Chairman,

Pending the CTBT's entry into force, we strongly call for the immediate and
unconditional cessation of all nuclear weapon tests, including the use of alternative
ways, as well as any attempt to upgrade, modernize, or advance modern technologies
for the existing nuclear weapon system and its delivery, be it strategic or non-strategic,
deployed or non-deployed.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, we wish that this session of the Preparatory Committee, under
your able leadership, would be able to provide a robust foundation for us to advance
the cause of international peace and security, as well as to strike a balance between
non-proliferation and disarmament pillar of the treaty.
Thank you.

