Please check against delivery

Statement by
Delegation of the Republic of Indonesia

at the First Preparatory Committee Meeting
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 1: Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, disarmament
and international peace and security

Vienna, 2 – 12 May 2017

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, Indonesia associates itself with the statement made earlier on Cluster 1
issues by the Group of Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.
Indonesia has been a strong advocate of the need for balanced progress in all three
pillars of upon which the Treaty is founded.
Balance is particularly important between the disarmament pillar and non-proliferation
pillar, as they are not only closely interrelated but also mutually reinforcing. And both
are vital for strengthening international peace and security.
Mr. Chairman,
The focus of international community related to non-proliferation issues has been
extensively discussed in many fora, and not only within the context of NPT.
At the same time, we have to be mindful that Non-nuclear weapon states have given
their commitment to forego any aspiration to develop nuclear weapons quid pro quo
with the irrevocable commitment of nuclear weapon states to systematically and
progressively implement Article VI of the NPT.
However, Nonproliferation alone is not enough to create a safe and peaceful world,
which we aspire to. Absolute non-proliferation must be complemented by real
disarmament implementation.
For non-nuclear weapon states, it is difficult to understand how we can realistically
expect less powerful states to forego aspirations to develop nuclear weapons if states
among the most powerful military forces in history insist that they still need nuclear
weapons to defend themselves.
As we believe that the three pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing, we also
believe that significant progress in multilateral disarmament would boost significant
progress in other pillars. A complete, verifiable, and irreversible disarmament by the
NWS will show their goodwill and eradicate the feeling of fear felt by the NNWS of the
possible use of nuclear weapons, and thus, the raison d’etre for proliferation of
nuclear weapon itself will vanish.
It is, therefore, our strong view that rebalancing this agenda has utmost importance
as we begin the new NPT review cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
It is worth reminding that in 2010, Indonesia and other NAM countries submitted a
proposal to the Review Conference on elements for a plan of action for the
elimination of nuclear weapons.
Despite the successful outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, however, it is
regretful to see that the elements were not well reflected in the outcome documents,
nor fully implemented afterwards by states parties of the NPT.

At the same time, fulfillment of disarmament obligations under Article VI of the Treaty
does not show any promising progress so far. The NWS have not undertaken the 13
practical steps in the manner that they unequivocally agreed to at the 2000 Review
Conference. The role and significance of nuclear weapons are not diminished in all
military and security concepts, doctrines and policies.
Indonesia, therefore, calls for the full and urgent implementation of the action plans
adopted at the 2010 NPT Review Conference on nuclear disarmament, the 1995
decision on Principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,
the 13 practical steps agreed to in 2000, as well as the fulfillment of obligation under
Article VI of the Treaty.
Mr. Chairman,
While we note the claim of the two largest possessors of nuclear weapons that
thousands of their nuclear weapons have been retired and dismantled through their
bilateral strategic agreement, they are yet to be verifiable and transparent.
In line with most of the other state parties has been mentioned repeatedly, we
reiterate that nuclear disarmament must be complete, verifiable and irreversible. To
this end, we would like to highlight that International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which we have confidence on their impartiality and professionalism, is a credible and
capable organization in safeguarding nuclear disarmament.

Mr. Chairman,
The adoption of UN General Assembly Resolution on Taking forward multilateral
nuclear disarmament negotiations, has been very well welcomed by the
overwhelmingly large majority of the international community. We are encouraged by
the spirit of hope for progress in the field of disarmament, to achieve a world free of
nuclear weapons.
It is unfortunate that nuclear weapons states and some other states still express their
unwillingness to join the process.
We would like to underline that Indonesia does not share some opinions stating that
the negotiation on the treaty for the prohibition of nuclear weapons might somehow
undermine the NPT.
On the contrary, we are convinced that such treaty will in fact strengthen and
complement the NPT, particularly on the disarmament pillar. Indonesia envisages the
treaty to affirm its mutually enforcing nature with the NPT. In this regard, we call on
all NPT States Parties to support and join the process.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia also continues to consider the CTBT as a key element of the disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. We call upon the remaining Annex II countries who
have not signed or ratified, to immediately do so without delay.

Pending the CTBT’s entry into force, we strongly call for the immediate and
unconditional cessation of all nuclear weapon tests as well as any attempt to
upgrade, modernize, or advance new technologies for the existing nuclear weapon
system, be it strategic or non-strategic, deployed or non-deployed.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, we wish that this session of the Preparatory Committee,
under your able leadership, would be able to provide a robust foundation for us to
advance the cause of international peace and security, as well as to strike a balance
between non-proliferation and disarmament pillar of the treaty.
Thank you.

