Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations
28, chemin du Petit-Saconnex / 1209 Geneva

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Ali Asghar Soltanieh
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the IAEA and other International Organizations in Vienna
at the Second Session of the NPT Preparatory Committee
Cluster I - on Nuclear Disarmament
Geneva, 25 April 2013
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to associate my delegation with the statement delivered by the
distinguished representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement on
this cluster.
Nuclear disarmament is a fundamental pillar of the NPT which has the highest
priority in the NPT review cycle. Many countries including the NAM members have
consistently requested the realization of nuclear disarmament in a phased program
and within a specified framework of time. However, despite the obligations under
Article VI of the Treaty and the commitments made by the nuclear-weapon States at
the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and their unequivocal undertaking
to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenal adopted at the 2000 NPT
Review Conference as well as their commitment made at the 2010 Review
Conference to accelerate progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament,
developments in the area of nuclear disarmament have not been promising and do
not indicate compliance with disarmament obligations.
The lack of effective and systematic progress towards implementing nuclear
disarmament obligations under article VI of the NPT is disturbing and deplorable. I
am aware that over the past half-century, thousands of nuclear warheads have been
disassembled, but many of them have been recycled as warheads of a different type
or even re-manufactured. Nuclear warheads undergo a vicious life cycle that
includes manufacture, storage, deployment, and then storage again, followed by
disassembly and re-manufacture or transfer into weapon-grade fissile material
stockpiles to be ready for future use. Therefore the mere reduction in the number of
warheads cannot be regarded as fulfilling nuclear disarmament undertakings.

Limited reductions of nuclear weapons mostly do not go beyond mere
decommissioning. They, therefore, do not abide by the principle of "irreversibility",
which was agreed by the nuclear-weapon States at the 2000 NPT Review
Conference and reaffirmed in the Action 2 of the 2010 Review Conference's Action
Plan.
The 13 practical steps in the 2000 NPT Review Conference for the systematic and
progressive efforts to implement Article VI of the Treaty has become instrumental
towards the goal of nuclear disarmament. These steps, in particular the
"unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament under Article VI
of the Treaty" is part of the implementation of disarmament pillar of the Treaty that
have not been realized due to the lack of faithful commitment of the NWS to this
undertaking. As reaffirmed in the agreed Action Plan on nuclear disarmament of the
2010 Review Conference, the practical steps adopted by consensus at the 2000
Review Conference constitute the basis of our deliberations on nuclear
disarmament in the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty.
In Actions 3 and 5 of the 2010 Review Conference's Action Plan, the nuclear-weapon
States also reaffirmed their commitment to the further reduction of non-strategic
nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the arms
reduction and disarmament process. In spite of that commitment, no practical steps
have been taken to reduce tactical nuclear weapons by the nuclear-weapon States.
The upcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty should consider
national reports of the nuclear-weapon States to be furnished, in accordance with
the Actions 5 and 20 of the 2010 Review Conference's Action Plan, with respect to
their obligations to implement Article VI of the Treaty, including measures adopted
by them to implement 13 practical steps for the systematic and progressive efforts
to implement Article VI of the NPT and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the 1995 decision
on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
Nuclear disarmament is an obligation and to fulfill this obligation the adoption and
applying of the following 8 measures and principles as a package are required. None
of these measures or principles solely and by itself is a panacea for nuclear
disarmament problems but all of them together as a composite whole can
contribute a lot to the realization of nuclear disarmament:
1- Transparency: The threat of the nuclear arsenal is a common threat to all
human beings. The elimination of this threat should be done in a transparent
2

manner. During the cold war nuclear secrecy was a deception tool for
preserving the supremacy in the nuclear rivalries. It is long time that we have
past that era and its presumptions. Now is the right time for NWS to convince
their military establishments, as the major impediment in this regard, that
transparency can enhance national security rather than weaken it. If NWS are
honest in fulfilling their obligations and they do not intend to divert their
nuclear warheads again, this intention should be demonstrated by an
international system of materials protection, control and accounting. The
international community should be aware of all stocks of nuclear warheads,
the targeted warheads, the inventory and full information about the means of
delivery of the nuclear arsenals, full information about weapon-grade nuclear
materials and their facilities to monitor their reduction and destruction as
transparency measures. In this connection, we ask all the nuclear-weapon
states to start their reporting in this regard based on standard reporting form
as called for in the 2010 NPT Action Plan. Any reduction of nuclear weapons,
whether strategic or non-strategic, should be in a transparent manner.
Needless to say, such reduction in nuclear weapons can never be a substitute
for the main obligation of the nuclear-weapon States, namely the total
elimination of nuclear weapons.
2- Irreversibility: The reduction in the arsenal should not be limited to
decommissioning of the nuclear warheads. It should be in a manner that
prevents any reloading of the material, therefore the principle of
Irreversibility is of utmost important in realization of the nuclear
disarmament.
3- Verifiability: Disarmament should provide for adequate measures of
verification in order to create the necessary confidence and ensure that they
are being observed by all international community. Therefore the principle of
verifiability is vital in realization of the nuclear disarmament. The form and
modalities of the verification should be determined based on the purposes,
scope and nature of the activities involved by international community. The
verification system should provide for application of a combination of several
methods of verification as well as other compliance procedures. Moreover, in
the absence of any mechanism to verify the implementation of unilateral,
bilateral and multilateral declarations made or agreements reached regarding
the fulfillment of nuclear disarmament obligations, the NPT Review
3

4-

5-

6-

7-

Conference should establish a standing Committee to ensure implementation
of the commitments made with regard to Article VI obligations.
Ban on use: Removing the threat of use of nuclear weapon deliberately or
accidentally is the most acute and urgent task of the present day. Mankind is
confronted with the most serious threat ever perceived. All States, in
particular nuclear-weapon States, should consider various proposals designed
to secure the avoidance of the use of nuclear weapons, and the prevention of
nuclear war. In this context, providing the necessary assurances in a legally
binding instrument for non use of nuclear weapons and effective
arrangements, to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or the
threat of use of nuclear weapons is imperative. As a first step to address the
issue of illegality of use or threat of use, Iran believes that, the Review
Conference should adopt a decision by which the Conference "decides that
the threat or use of nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon State
Party to the Treaty shall be prohibited". We have no other choice either we
proceed to disarmament or face annihilation. The US New Posture Review
policy and The UK's notion of the legitimate use of nuclear weapons add to
the already grave concerns of the international community regarding the
continued existence of nuclear weapons and the risk of their use.
Time frame: The international community cannot wait forever to witness the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. A clear time frame with a target date for
the full implementation of Article VI, namely 2025 as proposed by the NonAligned Movement is an urgent need.
Budget Reduction on nuclear weapons: It is time to realize the long overdue
goal of SSOD1 to abandon the use of force in international relations and to
seek security in disarmament. The economic and social consequences of the
continued existence and the modernization of nuclear weapons are so
detrimental that its continuation is obviously destroying the international
economic order. In a world of limited resources, economic crisis and tough
austerity measures there is a close relationship between expenditure on
nuclear weapons and economic and social development. It is unfortunate that
the military expenditures are reaching ever higher levels and in dramatic
contrast to the poverty in which two thirds of the world's population live,
hundreds of billions of dollar spent by one nuclear weapon state annually on
qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons.
Qualitative and quantitative disarmament measures: these are two sides of
one coin and are both important for halting the arms race and nuclear war. As
4

the world remains over-involved in efforts to reduce the number of nuclear
weapons, or horizontal proliferation, some nuclear weapons states have a
free hand in vertical proliferation and qualitative improvement of their
arsenal unabatedly. Efforts to that end must include negotiations on the
limitation and cessation of the qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons.
Contrary to the declaratory policy of the US and the UK regarding its
commitment to its nuclear disarmament obligations under the NPT, By
replacing and modernizing their nuclear arsenals under NPR and the Trident
nuclear weapons system which have an estimated cost of 100 billion Euros
and dollars the They are launching a nuclear rearmament rather than nuclear
disarmament. This will equip them with more destructive nuclear weapons for
killing and destruction of thousands of people. This is in contravention of their
international obligations.
8- Nuclear doctrines: In this regard, the nuclear weapon states should promptly
adopt necessary measures for unequivocal and absolute diminishing role and
significance of nuclear weapons in all military and security concepts, doctrines
and policies. A real change is needed regarding the removal of the emphasis
on the doctrine of nuclear deterrence. A review of the nuclear policy of
certain nuclear-weapon States, especially the US shows a reverse trend. The
continued emphasis of Nuclear Posture Review of the United States on
maintaining nuclear weapons and the deterrence policy, the plan to spend
hundreds of billions of dollars on the modernization of the nuclear arsenals,
constructing new facility for production of new nuclear weapons, no
movement towards ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, and raising new excuses for keeping nuclear weapons in the Nuclear
Posture Review, are clear indications of the continued policy of that State to
evade its nuclear disarmament obligation. More worrisome are
announcements by France. It has deployed a new nuclear-armed ballistic
missile submarine to its nuclear arsenal. The President of that country was
quoted as saying, "French nuclear forces are a key element in Europe's
security". This indicates that France, in defiance of its international
obligations, is seeking new roles for its nuclear forces in order to justify their
continued retention. In so doing, it even resorts to irresponsible methods
such as manipulation of intelligence and frightening its own people to
promote programmes that its people would otherwise not support. Another
serious concern is the continuation and expansion of nuclear sharing among
the nuclear-weapon States or with non-nuclear weapon States under military
5

alliances. A regrettable example in this regard is the agreement signed by
France and UK. It is an open secret that France is the only NPT State party that
has categorically rejected the legal obligations for nuclear disarmament both
in word and action, and has tried to invent a new concept of conditional
disarmament.
In conclusion Mr. Chairman, Taking into account the abovementioned measures
and principles and also the fact that government support for a convention
eliminating nuclear weapons has grown significantly in recent years, I believe it is
high time to start negotiation on a Nuclear Weapons Convention in the CD as a
matter of top priority. Such a convention must legally prohibit, once and for all, the
possession, development, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons by any country
and provide for the destruction of such inhumane weapons. In this context, the IAEA
should fulfill its responsibility in nuclear disarmament as stipulated in its Statute.
Pending the conclusion of the nuclear weapon convention, The Preparatory
Committee and the 2015 NPT Review Conference have the task of addressing the
concerns of the non-nuclear-weapon States emanating from the development and
deployment of new nuclear weapons and their means of delivery and alleviating
these concerns by considering a decision on the prohibition of the development, the
modernization and the production of any new nuclear weapons, particularly mininukes, as well as a ban on the construction of any new facility for the development,
deployment and production of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery at
home and in foreign countries. The NPT review process should be able to reiterate
once again its unconditional call for the full implementation of the unequivocal
undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of
their nuclear arsenals, and must assess the implementation of the 13 practical steps
agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference and the Action Plan on nuclear
disarmament adopted by consensus at the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
I thank you.

6

