--Please check against delivery --

Statement by H.E. Mr. G, Hossein_Dehghani,
Director General for International Political and Security Affairs and
Head of Delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran
On Nuclear Disarmament
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, 4 May 2017

In the Name of God, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful.
Mr. Chairman,
I associate my delegation with the NAM statement delivered by the distinguished
representative of Indonesia.
Nuclear disarmament as the fundamental objective ofthe Treaty remains our highest priority. It
requires our special attention, particularly in this review cycle of the Treaty that coincides with
the 50 th anniversary of its entry into force. The 2020 Review Conference should therefore make
concrete decisions on the long-delayed implementation of Article VI ofthe Treaty.
Unfortunately, the lack of real progress in nuclear disarmament has been the main
implementation challenge in the past near 50 years. If we fail to overcome this challenge, it
continues to have its adverse impact on the very foundations, integrity. credibility and
relevance of the Treaty.
The records of nuclear-weapon States over the past 47 years have clearly proved that they have
and continue to be consistently inconsistent with their obligations under Article VI of the
Treaty. This situation cannot continue indefinitely. It is a clear case of non-compl ianee and
must be actively addressed by this NPT Review cycle ..
The obligation under Article VI is quite clear. Its implementation is neither optional, nor is it
conditional on anything, including such concepts as "strategic stability" or "international
I
security environment". This is a fact that is also emphasized by the International Court of
Justice when it ruled unanimously, in its Advisory Opinion of 8 July 1996, that 'There exists
an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control".
The total elimination of nuclear weapons was the main NPT's promise that encouraged nonnuclear-weapon States to accede to it. Unquestionably, they never meant to be part of a Treaty
that divides its parties to nuclear-weapon-haves and have-nots and fails to put an end to the
possession of such inhumane weapons by a few powers.
We share the views that reject the assumption that the indefinite extension of the Treaty
implies the indefinite possession of nuclear arsenals by a few or that nuclear weapons are
legitimately held weapons. Such assumptions are certainly incompatible with the objectives
and purposes of the Treaty, as this Treaty seeks not only to prevent non-nuclear-weapon States
from acquiring nuclear weapons, but also to eliminate nuclear-weapons all together.
Mr. Chairman,

According to the latest estimates, today there are more than 15,000 nuclear weapons
worldwide. Quantitatively, they are nearly 79 per cent less than during the Cold War era.
Qualitatively, however, it is hardly acceptable to argue that the destructive power of current
nuclear weapons is less than those existing during the Cold War era. It is a fact that the yield of
nuclear weapons has increased from kilotons to megatons; A-bombs have been replaced with
H-bombs, which are thousands of times more destructive than the former; and the destructive
power of existing nuclear weapons is roughly 8 to 100 times larger than those dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. One should also take into account the fact that most of the reduced
warheads have only been moved from operational status to various reserve, inactive, or
contingency categories. Therefore, most of nuclear warheads continue to exist and have not
actually been dismantled. Therefore, as regards the threat of nuclear weapons, our world does
not seem to be more secure than during the Cold War era.
Despite the cessation of nuclear arms race for some years in the past, recently we hear alarming
and disappointing announcement by one nuclear-weapon State that it intends to continuously
strengthen and expand its nuclear arsenal to ensure its place at the "top of the pack" and that it
is "never going to fall behind on nuclear power". In addition, such an important, yet imperfect,
arms reduction treaty as the New START was criticized as "a one-sided deal" and "bad deal".
Such statements should be considered as a clear indication of, and an explicit invitation for, the
start of a new nuclear arms race.
As taking effective measures on cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date is an
obligation under article VI of the Treaty, this provocative policy, which definitely runs counter
to that obligation and clearly contradicts the object and purpose of the Treaty, must be
rescinded. While existing nuclear weapons seriously threaten the international peace and
security and the very survival of humanity, our world cannot and should not tolerate a new
nuclear arms race.
Mr. Chairman,

Article VI of the Treaty is not the only unimplemented obligation. Unfortunately, the decisions
and action plans on nuclear disarmament adopted since 1995 are yet to be implemented. For
instance, reporting to the 2015 Review Conference about the number of meetings by nuclearweapon States and the preparation by them of a glossary of nuclear terms is the only
implemented parts of the 22-point action plan of the 20 I 0 Review Conference on nuclear
disarmament! This approach is indicative of the resort to delaying tactics by nuclear-weapon
States, which renders impossible the full implementation of the NPT.

In conclusion. Mr. Chainnan. my delegation stresses that the persistence of non-compliance
with nuclear disannament obligations cannot and should not be tolerated anymore. The 2020
Review Conference should therefore take concrete actions to rectify this situation, stop the
ever-deepening frustration of non-nuclear-weapon States, prevent the continuous erosion of the
Treaty's credibility, and end the situations undermining the effectiveness of this important
instrument.

2

,
Our proposal to effectively implement article VI and all decisions on nuclear disarmament is a
pragmatic and phased action plan, containing practical and effective legal measures on all
aspects required for the total elimination of nuclear weapons, with an implementation timeframe and a robust international verification mechanism.
As an implementation time-frame for the fulfillment of the obligations and commitments on
nuclear disarmament is not an option but a must, we believe that the three-phased time-bound
action plan put forward by NAM NPT States parties deserves a serious consideration by this
Review cycle. The conclusion of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons, which is
also endorsed by the UN General Assembly, is and should be at the center of any such action
plan.
I thank yon Mr. Chairman.

3

