Mr. Chairman,
Since this is the first time I have the floor, I would like to congratulate you for the assumption of this important office and assure you the full cooperation of my delegation for the success of the meeting.
I would like to associate my delegation with the statement made by distinguished representative of Indonesia on behalf of Non-Aligned Movement under this cluster.
Mr. Chairman,
After the triumph of the Islamic Revolution of Iran, the Government carried out a review on all bilateral, multilateral contracts and treaties. The founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the late Imam Khomeini, on a number of occasions condemned nuclear weapons. In one of his speech to Iranian public and the world public at large, he said: "... if they continue to make huge atomic weapons and so forth, the world may he pushed into destruction and the major loss will afflict the nations. Everybody, wherever he is, the writers, intellectuals and scholars and scientists throughout the world should enlighten the people of this danger, so that the masses of people will
standup vis-a-vis these hvo powers themselves and prevent the proliferation of these arms."
The nuclear policy and diplomacy of the Islamic Republic of Iran is based on such principles which are also enshrined in its constitution. Condemning nuclear weapons and mobilizing the like minded countries and peace loving people of the world to take measures towards " World Free From Nuclear Weapons", at the same time enhancing peaceful uses of nuclear energy and combating any impediments and discrimination in benefiting from inalienable right.
Mr. Chairman,
One can not make accurate and credible assessment about nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament, if he or she loses sight of the necessity of careful review the historical background. Non-proliferation and disarmament can not be dealt with in isolation. Global political and security dimensions have to taken into careful consideration.
The NPT regime constitutes an integrated and balanced package of rights and obligations according to which the nuclear-weapon States undertake not to transfer or develop nuclear weapons and commit to practical steps towards nuclear disarmament.
In 1978, the final document of the Special Session Devoted to Disarmament confirmed nuclear disarmament as the highest priority on the disarmament agenda. In 1995, the NPT Extension Review Conference renewed the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States in the field of nuclear disarmament.
In 2000, the Review Conference adopted a number of practical steps, including the "unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament under article VI of the TreatyDuring the 2000 Review Conference, the nuclear-weapon States also committed themselves to "the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the arms reduction and disarmament processIn spite of that, the nuclear-weapon States have taken no practical step to reduce tactical nuclear weapons.
Since the 2000 NPT Review Conference, despite the obligations under article VI and undertakings by the nuclear weapon States in 1995 and 2000, developments in the area of nuclear disarmament have not been promising. Non-compliance towards achieving the goal of the complete nuclear disarmament still threatens international peace and security. Here are some examples:
-	The so called "Nuclear Posture Review" which still exists in a certain nuclear weapon State, provides for the development of new types of nuclear weapons,
-	The possible use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States and targeting nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty, in contravention of the assurances given by the nuclear weapon States at the time of the conclusion of the NPT and its indefinite extension.
-	The allocation of hundreds of millions of dollars to projects aimed at developing mini-nuclear weapons or the so-called bunker busters, by labeling them the simple research programs.
-	In addition to its previous threats of use of nuclear weapons against Non-Nuclear Weapon States in violation of its NPT obligations, and announcing the addition of a new nuclear-armed ballistic missile-carrying submarine to its nuclear arsenals, France recently has announced that it would develop new nuclear plans to modernize nuclear arsenals and army and will spend 377 billions of euros on this plan till 2020.
International community has a serious concern vis-a-vis the French nuclear weapons program, enrichment activities producing tons of high enriched uranium being for mere use in nuclear weapons, tons of plutonium produced by nuclear power plants being outside of any international surveillance. Under the shadow of cold war and the challenges and negotiations between the two major nuclear weapons possessors, France has continuously improved its secret nuclear weapons capabilities and nuclear arsenals stocks. The international community has to be recalled of the fact that France joined NPT decades after Treaty came into being, ignoring the calls by the world insisting to join the Treaty. One can pose a simple question of what was the advantage of France joining the NPT, where all its nuclear facilities being fully exempted from any international control.
-	Although France cites one or two measures regarding implementation of its nuclear disarmament obligations, it has not made any real progress in the
implementation of its nuclear disarmament obligations after 2000 NPT Review Conference.
- The 30 billion pounds Trident Project has created serious concern for international community since it proves the determination of the country concerned to keep nuclear deterrence for an unknown period which can go well beyond at least 2050.
Another concern of the international community is the lack of transparency regarding the nuclear activities of nuclear weapon States which is vital for strengthening the NPT regime. Few leaked news on submarine accidents to the media show the scale of dangers to the international peace and security as well as the great challenges created by the existing nuclear arsenals to the survival of mankind and the environment.
Mr. Chairman,
Uninterrupted release and dumping of nuclear wastes of nuclear submarines, in the international sea by Nuclear Weapon States, polluting the internal waters, contrary to international conventions including London Dumping Convention (LDC), is a matter of serious concern. One could refer to document in the IMO and other international relevant organizations in this respect.
Mr. Chairman,
In spite of these threatening and unfortunate facts, the Preparatory Committee and the 2010 NPT Review Conference have an urgent task to address the concerns of the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States emanating from the development and deployment of new nuclear weapons and their means of delivery by the Nuclear-Weapon States. These concerns need to be alleviated by considering a decision on the prohibition of development and the production of any new nuclear weapon, particularly mini-nukes, as well as a ban on the construction of any new facility for the development, deployment and production of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery in home and foreign countries.
Moreover, real concerns of the international community over vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, the transfer and deployment of nuclear weapons in territories of non-nuclear-weapon States, lowering the threshold of resort to nuclear weapons and the danger of using such inhumane
weapons in conventional conflicts and against Non-Nuclear-Weapon States Paties to the NPT, remain. Ironically, not only do some Nuclear Weapon States not take steps towards the total elimination of their arsenals, and give no security assurances to non-nuclear States parties, they also threaten to be the first user.
Mr. Chairman,
The US officials recently have pledged to reduce 80 percent of their nuclear arsenals. The international community rightly expects that such statement to be materialized and implemented in a transparent manner. It should also be highlighted that any reduction of nuclear weapons, whether strategic or non-strategic, should be in a transparent, verifiable and irreversible manner. Needless to say, such reduction in nuclear weapons can never be a substitute to the main obligation of Nuclear Weapon States, namely total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
The Islamic Republic of Iran has sponsored the UN General Assembly Resolution 62/24 on "follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons". According to this Resolution, the General Assembly has urged "the States Parties to the Treaty to follow up on the implementation of the nuclear disarmament obligations under the Treaty agreed to at the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty within the framework of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty and its Preparatory Committee."
We continue to believe in the need for conclusion of a Nuclear Weapon Convention on destruction and prohibition of research, possession, production, development, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons. In this regard, we reiterate our call for the establishment, as the highest priority and as soon as possible, of an Ad Hoc Committee on nuclear disarmament in the Conference on Disarmament. Till the conclusion of a Nuclear Weapons Convention similar to the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Nuclear Weapon States must honor their obligations under the NPT and immediately stop:
-	Any kind of development and research on nuclear weapons,
-	Any threat of use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon States,
-	Any modernization of nuclear weapons and their facilities,
-	Deployment of nuclear weapons in the territories of other countries,
-	Maintaining their nuclear weapons in the trigger-alert situation.
The total elimination of nuclear weapons, as the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, has been accepted in the second paragraph of its section on Article Vll of the final document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference. My government is of the view that the NPT Review Conference has a clear mandate to make a decision on negative security assurances. Therefore, my Government proposes that the Conference would establish an ad hoc committee to work on a draft legally binding instrument on this agenda.
Mr. Chairman,
Based on the above facts I can summarize the constraints and practical meaningful measures towards world free from nuclear weapons as follows:
Constraints:
•	Lack of political will by Nuclear Weapons States in taking reliable steps.
•	Lack of any international verification mechanism to verify the correctness of the declarations of Nuclear Weapons States regarding the reduction of number of nuclear weapons and reduction of explosive power of their arsenals, such as those we heard during this meeting, are correct and reliable.
•	Misinterpretation by Nuclear Weapons States of the provision of Article YI regarding the time limit of elimination of all nuclear weapons.
Proposals:
While reiterating the full implementation of unequivocal undertakings through 13 practical steps adopted by consensus in 2000 Review Conference, We are of the belief that the only reliable practical solution to this stalemate is: Setting a definite feasible deadline for full implementation of Article VI, through a resolution in the 2010 Review Conference. Otherwise, the only choice is to call for an amendment conference in order to incorporate timelines in article VI.
I would also recall Iran's proposal for prompt conclusion of Nuclear Weapon Convention.
Thank Yon Mr. Chairman