Islamic Republic of

I R A N

Permanent Mission to the United Nations

Please Check Against Delivery.

Statement by H.E. Mr. Reza Najafi
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations and other International Organizations- Vienna
At the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
On Cluster I: Nuclear Disarmament
New York, 2 May 2014

In the Name ofGod, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful
Mr. Chairman,

I would like to associate my delegation with the statement made by Indonesia on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Nuclear disarmament is a fundamental pillar of the Treaty. It is a long overdue
obligation, and the highest priority, and therefore its full realization should be in the
center of the activities of the Review Conference.
Recalling the unequivocal undertakings by the nuclear-weapon States and the 2010
plan of action on nuclear disarmament, we believe that the Preparatory Committee
should assess the status of their implementation and make concrete recommendations
to the 2015 Review Conference. This of course should be done within the framework
of overall assessment of the implementation of the decisions of previous Review
Conferences.
Measures such as continued modernization of nuclear weapons and developing new
types of such weapons undermine the implementation of agreed decisions and plan of
action on nuclear disarmament. They are in contradiction with the object and purpose
of the Treaty and need to be stopped. These issues need serious attention of this
meeting.

622 Third Ave, New York, NY 10017 Tel: (212) 687-2020 Fax: (212) 867-7086 email: iran@un.int

Likewise, what we hear from some nuclear-weapon States, as a result of unilateral or
bilateral reductions of their nuclear weapons, the number of such weapons has been
reduced. However, taking into account the fact that the existing nuclear weapons are
thousands of times more destructive than nuclear bombs of the 1950s, the question is
that whether these reductions have reduced the overall destructive power of nuclear
weapons? Indeed, contrary to the US claim, the most serious challenge to the integrity
and credibility of the NPT is the nuclear weapons of the US and the other nuclearweapon States which can destroy humanity and whole earth hundred times.
Therefore, reductions in all aspects, in particular through actual dismantlement of the
weapons, should continue and also be expedited. Nevertheless, it should not be
considered as a substitute for the total elimination of these weapons which is the only
absolute grantee against their threat and intentional or unauthorized use as well as the
risk of nuclear-weapon accidents.
Nuclear-weapon-sharing and improving the role of nuclear weapons in military and
security doctrines are sources of grave concern. As we reaffirmed in the context of
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly, "any use of nuclear weapons would
be a violation ofthe Charter of the United Nations and a crime against humanity", and
therefore all States at all times should "comply with applicable international law,
including international humanitarian law." This meeting should discuss and make
substantive recommendations on the ways and means to ensure that such weapons
would never be used again.

Mr. Chairman,

As also unanimously concluded by the International Court of Justice, there exists an
obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective
international control. This issue also needs our attention in the Preparatory Committee
and the Review Conference. In doing so, we should take advantage of the momentum
for taking forward multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament created by the
first ever high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, held
on 26 September 2013.
In this context, the Committee is called to build on the elements of the General
Assembly Resolution 68/32, and to strongly call on the Conference on Disarmament
to agree on a comprehensive and balanced program of work, providing also for an
urgent commencement of negotiations on a comprehensive convention on nuclear
weapons to prohibit their possession, development, production, acquisition, testing,
stockpiling, transfer, use or threat of use, and to provide for their destruction.
2

In the same vein, and recalling the decision by the General Assembly to declare 26
September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, we
believe that the Preparatory Committee should acknowledge the importance of this
initiative in furthering the NPT objective on nuclear disarmament.
The Preparatory Committee should also acknowledge the important decision made by
the Assembly this year to convene, no later than 2018, a United Nations high-level
international conference on nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this
regard. With no doubt, such a high-level international conference would provide the
international community with an unprecedented opportunity to advance the objective
of the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free world, where all nations and generations
can live free from fear of these vicious weapons.
In its turn, my delegation stands ready to engage constructively in formulating
substantive recommendations in support of advancing nuclear disarmament.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

3

