IRELAND
Statement by

Mr. Breifne O'Reilly,
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Dublin

At the

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of NucIear Weapons

Main Committee I

New York, 6 May 2015

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND TO THE UNITED NATIONS
885 SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TELEPHONE 212 421·6934 FAX 212 752·4726
newyorkpmun@dfa.ie

[reland's National Cluster I statement

Mr. Chair,
Ireland associates itself fully with the statement delivered by New Zealand on behalf of the New
Agenda Coalition. Ireland is particularly proud to be among the [59 countries who joined
together with one voice, delivered by the Foreign Minister of Austria, to clearly state that "it is in
the interests of the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never used again under
any circumstances." Our advocacy for a world free of the threat of nuclear weapons is firmly
rooted in our belief that there is no circumstance in which the use of a nuclear weapon, or any
other weapon of mass destruction, can ever be justified.
Mr. Chair,
We need to remember today the prevailing political environment at the time the NPT was
negotiated. The climate at that time meant the Treaty was established as a provisionally
incomplete instrument which, while countering the proliferation of nuclear weapons, would
allow the existing weapons states a small measure of time and space to disarm their arsenals as
soon as they could. The Treaty provided a basis for complete nuclear disarmament, however,
through Article VI. This was to manifest itself in good faith negotiations on "effective measures"
for an end to the arms race and nuclear disarmament. The reason for the disarmament provisions
was that the horror of the nuclear explosions in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, about which we heard
again last week from the Hibakusha, was fresh in the mind of the negotiators.
The decision to extend the Treaty indefinitely in 1995 must be seen as a collective recognition
that we as States Parties had failed to achieve the disarmament objectives within the original 25
years the Treaty was designed to last. Every 5 years since the indefinite extension, States Parties
have gathered at Review Conferences to look forward as well as back. As the distinguished
Ambassador of Mexico has said, we non-nuclear weapons states want to be ambitious and
constructive at this Review Conference. We want substantive and clear discussions on how to
move forward with negotiations provided for in the Treaty and what are the effective measures
we should pursue.
If we look back at what has been achieved with regard to nuclear disarmament under the NPT
since [995, the record appears to be the following: the thirteen practical steps for systematic and
progressive efforts to implement Article VI, which were agreed at the 2000 Review Conference
remain almost completely unimplemented; in 2005 , the Review Conference could not achieve an
agreed outcome. In 20 I 0, the Review Conference agreed, without a vote, 64 actions under the
Treaty's three pillars. This Review Conference will be examining the extent to which the 22
action points, which included concrete steps for the total elimination of nuclear weapons, have
been implemented. Once we have collectively made that assessment, then we, as States Parties,
must decide what we do next to achieve the total elimination of nuclear weapons. We all have an
obligation under Article VI of the Treaty: there is no opt-out clause; nor is there conditionality,
and furthermore the obligation to engage in good faith negotiations has been interpreted by the
IC] as a requirement to bring those negotiations to a conclusion.

Mr. Chair,
Ireland has to ask how we are to get closer to achieving and maintaining a world free of nuclear
weapons when we hear of programmes to modernise nuclear weapons, some of which are to run
for several decades into the future? How are we to reconcile this with the "unequivocal
undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament"? There are voices which tell us that it is in our interests that nuclear weapons are
maintained and modernised; that we benefit from the stability they offer the world order. The
conflict we see in so many regions today suggest that nuclear weapons have not provided
stability. In fact, I firmly believe that if there were a nuclear weapon detonation - the risk of
which is as real today as ever - it would completely undermine the stability of the world order,
possibly for generations.
Ireland fully acknowledges the very considerable reductions in nuclear arsenals that have taken
place and that the number of nuclear weapons is now at its lowest level since the height of the
Cold War. However, almost half a century after it entered into force, not one weapon from
within the five nuclear stockpiles recognised by the NPT has been eliminated on foot of
multilateral negotiations envisaged under Article VI. In fact, there are no arrangements for
nuclear disarmament set out in the Treaty. We therefore have to ask where are the effective
measures leading to nuclear disarmament which each State Party to this Treaty undertook to
pursue back in 1968? In light of the credible research that has emerged on risk and near accidents
in several jurisdictions, it is no longer sufficient for us to rely on some kind of grace and favour
reductions negotiated bilaterally by the Nuclear Weapons States. All of our citizens have a stake
in this.
The UN Secretary General reminded us that "no country disputes the desirability of achieving a
nuclear-weapon-free world." Ireland agrees with Secretary General Ban's remark that "The more
we understand about the humanitarian impacts, the more it becomes clear that we must pursue
disarmament as an urgent imperative." If these weapons are judged by the vast majority to be
bereft of moral justification and utilitarian value; if they have been shown to have appalling and
indiscriminate destructive capacity to which the Hibakusha testify including at this Review
Conference; why is there a reluctance to discuss legal pathways to eliminate them, as all States
are obliged to do under the Treaty?
Ireland is grateful to the Governments of Norway, Mexico and Austria for their leadership in
hosting 3 major international conferences on the humanitarian impact of a nuclear detonation.
Given what we now know on this subject, we need to ask ourselves whether we are prepared to
acquiesce in a situation where - in one region or another, sooner or later - a nuclear weapon may
one day be either used or set off accidentally. Ireland fully agrees with the ICRC that there is a
need to fill the legal gap to eliminate nuclear weapons, as provided for in the Pledge adopted by
Austria after the Vienna Conference. As President Maurer said, "It is the time to draw legal,
political and operational conclusions from what has been learned about those 'catastrophic
humanitarian consequences' which States party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty recognized five
years ago."

The compelling evidence about the devastating impact of nuclear weapons which we have heard
at the three international conferences - particularly from the Hibakusha and the survivors of
nuclear tests - cannot in our view be ignored. The inability of the international system to respond
in any way adequately to a nuclear weapons detonation cannot be ignored. And the research
showing the ever-present risks of a nuclear weapon detonation cannot be ignored. All these
factors underline the clear and unambiguous obligation upon all States Parties to this Treaty to
enter into negotiations leading to effective measures for nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chair,
Together with our partners in the New Agenda Coalition, we have been examining and analysing
what effective measures leading to nuclear disarmament might look like. In 2013, in the Open
Ended Working Group to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations, Egypt
presented a paper on behalf of the NAC elaborating the possible ingredients of a legal instrument
to be negotiated between States; in April last year, in the final session of the Preparatory
Committee for this Review Conference, Ireland presented WP 18, outlining elements of the various
approaches that have been set forth in the public domain as possible legal instruments. And now
this year, New Zealand, as NAC Coordinator, has submitted WP 9. The paper highlights the
possible legal pathways for pursuing the effective measures for nuclear disarmament mandated by
Article VI of the NPT. It is a constructive and cogent document which does not seek to prescribe
the particular legal instrument to be pursued by way of discussion between States. However, it is
no longer a question of whether these discussions should take place: that after all is a Treaty
obligation. Nor is there any doubt in the NAC that there is a need for an agreed legal pathway to
achieving nuclear disarmament. Moreover, the cumulative evidence presented at 3 international
conferences demands that a start to the discussions on the legal pathways be made now.
We look forward to engaging in a substantive discussion with all States Parties in this Committee
on effective measures. All States Parties undertook to negotiate effective measures leading to
nuclear disarmament. Not only have we not held those negotiations and brought them to a
conclusion as we were enjoined to do by the International Court of Justice: 45 years on, we have
not even started. If we don't start, how can we conclude? And if we don 't start, how can we reach
a world without nuclear weapons to which we all aspire.

In the spirit of constructive engagement you have requested, and in order to strengthen the
text of the draft Report and more generally the NPT which you underlined at the end of
yesterday's meeting, Ireland is submitting in writing separately today a number of
amendments to the text. I would be grateful if these could be considered by the Chair. The
following brief general comments explain the overriding reasons for the written amendments.

Ireland associates itself entirely with the statements of New Zealand on behalf of the New
Agenda Coalition and with that delivered by Austria on behalf of 159 States Parties, an 80%
majority of States Parties to the NPT, whose message is clear: nuclear weapons must never be
used again under any circumstances and the only way to guarantee this is to eliminate them
totally. In this respect, and in others, we subscribe fully to the cogently expressed
comments of the distinguished Ambassador of South Africa.
A number of delegations have suggested during the course of our discussions that there are
no legal gaps in Article VI and that the current arrangement of voluntary ad hoc reductions,
which we welcome, satisfy or somehow "keep faith" with Article VI's demand for effective
measures for disarmament. This suggestion cannot in our view be sustained. It ignores the
reality of what Article VI demands. Article VI demands a framework of measures that will
achieve nuclear disarmament; these are to be negotiated by each of the Parties to the Treaty,
they have to be effective, and the negotiations are to be in good faith. Moreover, in the
unanimous view expressed in the advisory opinion of the ICJ, the negotiations are to be
concluded and are to have the effect of providing for nuclear disarmament in all its aspects,
under strict and effective international control. We cannot here, at an NPT Review
Conference, do other than reflect and reinforce these simple truths. In fact, we should act on
them with urgency.
Mr Chairman,
It has been suggested yesterday that we are now moving into the final phase of our
discussions and that we should focus on problem solving and on areas that unite us. You can
be assured of Ireland's continued constructive engagement with you and all States Parties. In
doing this, we believe that we must acknowledge reality. What we have learned about the
risks and consequences of any use of nuclear weapons no longer affords us the luxury of
simply continuing with an ad hoc parallel process of voluntary disarmament outside the NPT.
What we have learned has changed the parameters of our discussion forever. That is the new
reality. It will present challenges for some states, and we will work through these with them
in a constructive spirit. The message delivered at this conference by Austria on behalf of the
vast majority of States represented here has been a consistent message throughout this review
cycle. Support for it has grown tenfold. As you eloquently noted this morning, the greater
good should no longer be subordinated to national interests.

Thank you
