Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I
Statement by Mr. Gerard Keown,
Director for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland
Mr. Chairman,
Ireland aligns herself with the statements delivered within this cluster by the European Union
and by Brazil on behalf of the New Agenda Coalition.
In our national statement during the General Debate, my delegation expressed the hope that
the success of the 2010 Review Conference can be built upon with an ambitious outcome to
the present review cycle in 2015. We believe that the process of mapping out where we want
the NPT to be in two years time, and how we will get there, must begin now. Central to this
will be an examination of what has been achieved since 2010.
It has always been my delegation’s view that the NPT must be implemented in a balanced
way across all three pillars. It has become clear – indeed has been made clear by the wider
UN membership at last year’s General Assembly meeting – that persistent underachievement
in progressing the global disarmament agenda is no longer acceptable. For this reason, we
believe it will be of particular importance that the twenty-two disarmament-related Actions
agreed to in 2010 receive our careful attention within this cycle.
Mr Chairman,
Ireland is not persuaded by arguments to the effect that the fact that nuclear weapons have not
been used in sixty-eight years means that they will not be used again. Nor do we believe that
the dissipation of Cold War tensions reduces the prospects of their use.
The very existence of these weapons poses unacceptable risks: the risk of accident; of
miscalculation at a time of crisis; the risk that these weapons will fall into the hands of a less
stable State in which rational calculations about use and non-use may not apply. There is
also, of course, the risk that these weapons could fall into the hands of terrorists for whom the
concept of deterrence simply does not arise.
When we consider the vast progress which humanity has made since 1945, it seems
incomprehensible indeed to us that we should tolerate, much less seek to justify, the
continued retention of such uniquely destructive and dangerous weapons when we know they
could, in an instant, change human life as we know it forever. Is this the best blueprint for
security that we can devise?

The nuclear weapons age will not end until the last weapon is destroyed. Ireland firmly
believes that we all have a role to play in making this happen. The nuclear weapons states of
course bear a special responsibility to move the disarmament agenda forward. We welcome
the steps they have taken thus far. However, only they can reduce and ultimately eliminate
their arsenals and we encourage them to show leadership in moving quickly to do so. Of
course, non nuclear weapons states also have a responsibility to promote the balanced
implementation of the Treaty. All States can and should report on the steps they are taking to
this end. In this respect, at the 2014 Preparatory Committee meeting, my delegation will
report on Ireland’s implementation of the 2010 action plan, as set out in Action 20 of that
Plan.
Mr. Chairman,
As a demonstration of the commitment to disarm, we believe that Action 5 of the 2010
Action Plan should receive particular attention. Under it, the nuclear weapons states have
committed to accelerate concrete progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament. Its
implementation will therefore be a key determinant of whether, in the wider sense, the
disarmament elements of Action Plan can be judged to have been successfully implemented.
Action 5 covers such key aspects of disarmament as reducing stockpiles (which is also
committed to under Action 3), and addressing the question of all nuclear weapons regardless
of their type or location as an integral part of the disarmament process. Importantly, it calls
upon the nuclear weapons states to enhance transparency and mutual confidence.
Ireland believes that the enhancement of transparency will be a critical element of success in
2015. We find it unacceptable that, forty three years after the NPT’s entry into force, we still
do not know how many of these weapons require to be disarmed. We call upon the nuclear
weapons states to move quickly to agree on and use a standard reporting form.
Concrete progress in a number of the areas covered by Action 5 would also go some way to
addressing the many humanitarian concerns expressed by Governments at the recent Oslo
Conference. These are important concerns, not expressed lightly. They are the concerns of
the majority of UN member states.
Action 5’s call upon the nuclear weapons states to diminish the role and significance of
nuclear weapons in military and security doctrines and concepts; to discuss policies that
could prevent their use; to reduce the operational status of nuclear weapons systems, take
action on de-alerting; and to reduce the risk of accidental use, would all represent significant
confidence building steps. We expect to hear from each of the nuclear weapons states on the
steps they have been taking to achieve this. It is a matter of regret that the nuclear weapons
states were not present at Oslo to listen to these concerns expressed by Governments and civil
society. The message from Oslo was nevertheless clear: humanity will be powerless to
respond to the uniquely destructive power which a nuclear detonation would unleash. This
was the message delivered again yesterday by our fellow NAC-member South Africa on
behalf of seventy eight NPT States Parties. There is a growing voice from governments and
civil society on this issue which should occupy a central place in our deliberations. It is
crucial that those who choose to possess these terrible weapons heed these concerns and we
encourage them to attend the meeting which our fellow NAC member Mexico will host next
year.

Mr. Chairman,
Reporting will be a crucial element of implementing the 2010 Action Plan for all NPT States
Parties, insofar as it seeks to address the transparency deficit. We will pay close attention to
the reports that are submitted to see how States Parties are meeting their commitments under
the Action Plan. We would expect each of the nuclear weapons states to submit
comprehensive reports on the steps which they have taken to implement each of their
undertakings, in particular, under Action 5. This will assist the 2015 Review Conference to
take stock and consider next steps towards achieving the full implementation of Article VI.
We encourage the nuclear weapons states to achieve the greatest possible transparency in this
regard, going beyond the steps already taken, thereby building confidence in their
commitment to disarm.
Mr. Chairman,
Progress on Action 6 of the Action Plan, which calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to
establish a subsidiary body to deal with nuclear disarmament, would immeasurably
strengthen the machinery for creating the disarmament agenda’s rule of law. Regrettably,
the current impasse in the Conference on Disarmament is unlikely to produce such a body.
Nevertheless, NPT States Parties can and should take every possible step to progress the
discussion on disarmament. Together we represent an overwhelming majority of the wider
UN membership, and each of us has undertaken, under Article VI, to pursue negotiations in
good faith on effective measures relating to nuclear disarmament. In the absence of
immediate prospects for the implementation of a programme of work in the Conference on
Disarmament, we urge all NPT States to engage with the Open Ended Working Group
established by the General Assembly to develop proposals and take forward multilateral
disarmament negotiations. While not fulfilling Action 6, this would demonstrate a
commitment to revitalising the disarmament machinery and would support the aims of Action
6.
Directly related to this is, of course, Action 15, concerning the call for negotiations towards a
treaty banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices. Engagement with the Group of Governmental Experts established by the
General Assembly to generate discussion around what such a Treaty might involve, can,
without cutting across the Conference on Disarmament, support its work and hopefully help
to remove the premium which has been placed on procedural rules as a means of determining
substantive progress. Process should never trump substance.
We therefore call upon all States Parties, and particularly the five nuclear weapons states to
engage with both of these initiatives.
Finally, Mr. Chairman,
We regret that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has still not entered into force.
The importance and urgency of this Treaty’s entry into force has long been recognised –
indeed it is the first of the Thirteen Practical Steps agreed to in 2000. By prohibiting nuclear
explosions in any environment by anyone, the CTBT would represent a thin blue line
between genuine peaceful uses and the development or qualitative improvement of nuclear
weapons. Recent provocative acts by the DPRK, which we have categorically condemned,
demonstrate the urgent need for this Treaty and Ireland asks the remaining Annex 2 states

whose ratification is needed to achieve its entry into force to sign and ratify the Treaty
without delay. This is something on which States can and must show leadership. Please do
not wait for others to act first.
While the CTBT has not yet entered into force, it represents an overwhelming international
consensus against nuclear weapons testing that each of us has a duty to protect. We expect all
States – including the DPRK – to respect this international consensus.
Mr. Chairman,
While all States Parties to the NPT must take responsibility for ensuring the Treaty’s full
implementation, it is clear that only the nuclear weapons states can achieve disarmament.
Progress on disarmament will strengthen in turn the non-proliferation regime. We can and
must do more to get the disarmament commitments back on track, to begin the work leading
to genuine disarmament negotiations, be they for a single, multilaterally negotiated
instrument or a series of mutually reinforcing agreements. Ireland and its partners in the New
Agenda Coalition have submitted two working papers – on nuclear disarmament and on
applying the principle of transparency in nuclear disarmament – which, as with previous
contributions from the NAC, we believe can contribute to our discussions going forward.
It is clear that, however we choose to take this agenda forward, we must act and we must act
now. As UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted in his recent Monterey address, delay
comes with a high price tag.
I thank you, Mr President.

