DELEGATION OF JAPAN TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
3, chemin des Fins - Po. Box 133 - 1211 GENEVA 19 - Switzerland
Tel. +41 (0) 22 71.73444 - Fax +41 (0) 22 7883818
Website: www.disarm.emb-japan.gojp

(Please check against delivery)

Statement by H.E. Mr. Mari Amano
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Japan
to the Conference on Disarmament

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
- Cluster I Specific Issue Security Assurances

Geneva, 25 April 2013

Mr. Chairman,
In this session, I would like to focus my statement on security assurances.

Mr. Chairman,
The risks of nuclear weapons are multi fold. Accordingly, we need to
address those risks from various perspectives. As my delegation has stated
during our discussion yesterday under Cluster I, Japan emphasizes the
importance of the qualitative reduction of nuclear weapons in parallel with
the quantitative reduction. In other words, it is fundamentally important
that all states possessing nuclear weapons diminish the role of nuclear
weapons in their national security strategies, as indicated in Action 5 of the
2010 Final Document. We should recognize, in this connection, that
negative security assurances can make a significant contribution to
reducing the role of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Chairman,
NSAs are in the legitimate interests of non-nuclear-weapon states. Japan
underscored in its official statement on signing the NPT in 1970 that "the
nuclear-weapon states must not have recourse to use of nuclear weapons or
threaten to use such weapons against non-nuclear-weapon states". NSAs
also provide non-nuclear-weapon states with incentives to remain as a party
to the NPT. Therefore, Japan continues to call upon nuclear-weapon states
to make their existing NSA pledges credible to the rest of the world and to
provide stronger assurances to non-nuclear-weapon states that comply with
the NPT. Japan welcomes the Nuclear Posture Review of the United
States and the Strategic Defense and Security Review of the United
Kingdom in this regard.

Mr. Chainnan,
Japan also believes that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
where appropriate, is a practical step to promoting and realizing legally
binding security assurances. As noted in Action 9 of the 2010 Final
Document, all concerned states, which encompass both nuclear-weapon
and non-nuclear-weapon states, are encouraged to constructively consult
and cooperate to bring about the entry into force of the relevant legally
binding protocols of all nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties. Further efforts
are needed to ensure effectiveness of those existing treaties.
In this connection, Japan strongly hopes that the Protocol of the Southeast
Asia Nuclear Free Zone Treaty enters into force at an early date.
Nuclear-weapon-free zones have also been established in other regions
such as South Pacific, Africa, and Central Asia. Japan appeals to all the
parties concerned to work together constructively in order to bring about
the expeditious entry into force of the respective protocol of each zone.

I thank you, Mr. Chainnan.

2

