STATEMENT BY NOBUSHIGE TAKAMIZAWA
AMBASSADOR OF JAPAN
TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR
THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (NPT)
- CLUSTERⅠ: NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT 4 MAY 2017, VIENNA
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT faces new challenges year after year. The worsening global and
regional security environment throughout the last several years has gradually
undermined peace and security. North Korea's nuclear and missile development
has now reached a new level. This is also a serious challenge to the
international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime centered on the
NPT. In this regard, I would like to refer to the NPDI's working paper on North
Korea in which the NPDI recommends that the next NPT Review Conference
remain seized of this matter.
Furthermore, we are without a clear guideline to pursue nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation leading up to 2020 due to the lack of outcome at the 2015
NPT Review Conference. This has caused a deep rift in the disarmament
community over how to achieve a total elimination of nuclear weapons. Against
this background, we should now redouble our efforts to maintain and strengthen
the NPT, which is the cornerstone of the international nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation regime, as well as the linchpin for international security over the
past half century. Japan calls upon all States parties to steadily implement the
Action Plan of 2010 and other measures agreed in the past Review Conferences
in 1995 and 2000.
In this regard, the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI), which
was established to jointly promote the nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation agendas as mutually reinforcing processes, continues to play a
1

constructive and proactive role and provides concrete and practical measures
during the current NPT Review Cycle. In addition, the Broadly Like Minded
(BLM) countries, while taking into account the security environment that we
currently face, pursue effective practical and legal measures illustrated by the
Progressive Approach.
Mr. Chairman,
As a member of the NPDI, Japan aligns itself with the joint statement, and we
would like to underscore the following points as priorities from our national
perspectives.
First, concrete disarmament efforts should be taken with a sense of urgency.
Looking over the slow progress of the nuclear disarmament pillar of this treaty, it
is especially evident that nuclear disarmament should accelerate concrete
progress. Japan urges all nuclear-weapon States to make further efforts to fulfill
their disarmament obligation by taking concrete disarmament measures during
this Review process.
Second is the further reduction of nuclear weapons and multilateral
disarmament processes. In order to fulfill the obligation of Article VI of the NPT, it
is indispensable for all nuclear-weapon States to comply with their unequivocal
undertaking to accomplish the total elimination of nuclear weapons agreed in the
2000 and 2010 Review Conferences. In addition, all nuclear-weapon States are
urged to further reduce all types of nuclear weapons, including non-strategic
nuclear weapons through a unilateral and bilateral basis, and eventually engage
in multilateral negotiations with all nuclear-weapon States. Japan expects that
the process of the five nuclear-weapon States will resume their work, which will
later form a basis for the eventual multilateral negotiations among them.
Meanwhile, pending the start of such a multilateral negotiation, Japan urges all
nuclear-weapon States to commit without delay in reducing their nuclear
weapons.
Third is increasing transparency by nuclear-weapon States. Without
transparency, negotiations on the reduction of nuclear weapons would become
extremely complicated, and nuclear disarmament would not be accomplished in
2

an irreversible manner. When implementing nuclear disarmament measures,
transparency is critical. Also, increased transparency alleviates mistrust among
states and is vital as a confidence-building measure and serves as a basis for a
stable international and regional security environment. Regarding this point, the
NPDI submitted a working paper entitled “Transparency by All States Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.” It encourages all
States parties to make use of this reporting template and to provide information
on how they have implemented their NPT commitments, particularly the 2010
Action Plan. Among other things, Japan urges nuclear-weapon States to commit
to utilizing the NPDI reporting form to make annual reports and to include
numerical information during the 2020 Review Cycle. Such action would
certainly be welcomed and contribute to filling the gap of trust and confidence
between nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon States, which is imperative to uphold
the NPT regime. Furthermore, we believe that reporting is an effective
instrument not only for increasing transparency on nuclear disarmament
activities but also for greater accountability as part of the strengthened review
process.
Fourth, the principle of verifiability, along with the principle of transparency and
irreversibility, must be applied to the nuclear disarmament process. efforts
towards the development of nuclear disarmament verification capabilities
provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation obligations and contribute to achieve our common goal. Japan
welcomes the establishment of the GGE on nuclear disarmament verification
next year in the UN. In addition, we commend the efforts of the IPNDV. These
initiatives are important platforms where both nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon
States can work together to deepen their understanding about the complex
challenges in the verification of nuclear disarmament.
Fifth, an FMCT and the CTBT are crucial building blocks necessary to reach
the “minimization point” to then realize a world free of nuclear weapons.
Japan will actively participate in the discussions at the high-level FMCT expert
preparatory group, established under the UN. We are convinced that this group
adds value to the work already carried out by the FMCT GGE and could lead to
the commencement of a negotiation of an FMCT. We should make no further
excuses that an FMCT negotiation cannot start due to the CD’s long stalemate.
3

Moreover, until the entry into force of an FMCT, we strongly urge all
nuclear-weapon States and states possessing nuclear weapons to declare or
maintain a moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices.
Japan urges all countries that have not yet signed or ratified the CTBT,
especially the eight remaining Annex 2 countries to take concrete action without
further delay, and not to wait for other countries to do so. The nuclear-weapon
States should acknowledge once again that they have a special responsibility for
the early entry into force of this Treaty. While the CTBT has not yet come into
force, the fact that the nuclear test ban has been adhered to by the international
community with very limited deviation is proof that it has become a de facto
international norm. Based on this reality, we strongly appeal to all
nuclear-weapon States and other states that hold nuclear weapons to declare or
maintain a moratorium on nuclear weapon test explosions until the entry into
force of the Treaty, and we strongly urge all countries to refrain from any nuclear
test.
Sixth, Japan believes that disarmament and non-proliferation education is a
valuable tool to advance nuclear disarmament and that it should be inclusive for
all nuclear disarmament approaches. It is imperative for us to pass on,
particularly to young generations, the devastation that was caused by the use of
nuclear weapons, the threat of diverse nuclear risks, and the necessary steps to
overcome these challenges. Japan encourages all states to implement the
recommendations contained in the 2002 UNGA report on the “United Nations
Study on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Education (A/57/124)” based on
Action 22 of the 2010 NPT Action Plan. In implementing this action, States
Parties should take into account measures as cooperation among a diverse
range of actors, critical thinking, information technology and raising awareness
for the realities of catastrophic humanitarian consequences, which are stressed
in the NPDI working paper entitled “Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
Education and Awareness-Raising,” submitted to this PrepCom.
Mr. Chairman,
Finally, there is the fact that negotiating a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons brings clear differences among the international community.
4

However, Japan encourages all nuclear and non-nuclear weapon States to focus
not on our differences but on common ground for nuclear disarmament. Japan,
as the only country to have ever experienced atomic bombings during war, has
been engaged in building up practical and concrete measures on the basis of
cooperation between nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states,
while not losing sight of a clear recognition of the humanitarian aspects of the
use of nuclear weapons and an objective assessment of the severe international
security environment.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

5

