Statement
by the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Geneva, April 27-30, 2018)
Cluster 1 Specific issues - Nuclear Disarmament
Mr. Chairman ,
We have stated a number of times from various international platforms
t hat possess10n
o t' nuc 1ear weapons natura
y /'f_generates a t hreat o f t h.eu
proliferation as well as of accidental or deliberate use.
Kazakhstan remains firmly committed to nuclear disarmament and
continues its tireless efforts to achieve a nuclear weapons-free world. We have
proved our determined and unfailing commitment by our example and we
once again urge everyone to actively strive for a future free of nuclear threats.
President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev, presiding at the UNSC
Thematic Briefing on Ja1:rnary 18, 2018 reiterated the need to achieve a world
free of nuclear weaponJ the UN's centenary in 2045.
It might seem that there is enough time at our disposal with over 20 years
ahead of us. However without concrete and concerted actions and clearly laid
out plans, it will be very difficult to achieve this goal. We have already lost
the past 20 years and yet we have not achieved any practical progress in
implementing Article 6 of the NPT.
This unfair and rather protracted imbalance became the reason for last
year's urgent multilateral negotiation process that ended with the adoption of
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. This treaty is a strong and
important signal that the overwhelming majority of the UN member-states are
ready to take concrete action to combat the nuclear threats.
Last year .. we 1thcrcfore, made the first step towardJ a nuclear weaponsfree future. The second step remains for the nuclear countries and their allies
to join in.
If one leg takes a step without being followed by the other, we are
guaranteed lose balance and fall. This applies to the current situation in the
~ J / {; /1,v/
(/
v v;," - ~ ,.,1 f
s, .
Unfortunately, the gap between the nuclear and non-nuclear communities
is becoming increasingly wider. This leads to a complete loss of trust and
mutual confidence, to greater disagreements
and disputes, and more
critically, to an extremely more dangerous confrontation in the world.
Moreover, the existence of Weapons of mass destruction is immoral and
contradicts
the
IHL.
Catastrophic
humanitarian
and environmental
consequences from nuclear tests in Semipalatinsk - and other nuclear test sites
around the globe - once again had prove'tl''\hat the consequences of any use of
nuclear weapons are uncontrollable in both time and space.
1 ) 11

Ir()

(

.,

;-

2

Hence , Kazakhstan , as one of the countries
which voluntarily
relinquished its nuclear arsenal and shut down the Semipalatinsk nuclear test
site , remains a staunch supporter of the global process of nuclear
disarmament.
For over more than four consecutive decades the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons has been a fundamental and 'integral part of
the international security and nuclear disarmament process. Despite the
Treaty's potential, we have to admit that progress in this dimension is slow
and does not meet expectations of the members of the world community.
Nuclear weapons possessing states outside the NPT must join the Treaty
without any preconditions as non-nuclear states. We are convinced that
national interests and security of any state should not be at the cost of other
peace-loving countries.
Mr. Chair ,
It is necessary to develop a truly effective mechanism of applying stringent
measures against acquiring and proliferating nuclear weapons. Such multilateral
treaties should be approved by relevant UNSC resolutions ..
As a main measure to remove incentives for possessing nuclear
weapons, it is necessary to develop a legally binding system of assurances by
nuclear powers to those states who would voluntarily renounce possession of
nuclear weapons, as well as to the states with non-nuclear status. This is a fair
proposition and can be done without significant expenditure. This would help
solve many of the current problems associated with nuclear disarmament.
We can be confident that all states not possessing nuclear weapons
demand such concrete and unconditional guarantees. This can be achieved by
adopting an additional protocol to the NPT or s01ne other legally binding
document.
Unfortunate)y,
general declarations
of intent or unilateral
statements do not -~
any legal obligations upon nuclear states, and
therefore will not contribute to confidence-building
in matters of nucl ear f€>pr"'1.
disannament and non-proliferation.
In pursuit of building a geography of sustainable peace, we attach great
importance to the expansion of nuclear weapons-free zones. In this context,
Kazakhstan ItaJ, ~1}-!tjat~~
.~,grop?~!l to consolidate the efforts of all states that
are part of denucleari'3ed zones. As a part of the implementation process of
this proposal we are organizing a special side event on this issue on May 3 in
cooperation with the Vienna Center for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
(VCDNP).
Thank you.

