Please, check against delivery

STATEMENT
by
Mr. Barlybay Sadykov
Ambassador-at-Large
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at Cluster 1 issues of the Third Preparatory Committee for the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

2 May 2014
New York

Mr. Chairman,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Kazakhstan considers nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as the
highest priority in our (national and international) agenda. The achievement of a
world free of nuclear weapons is a common goal for all of humankind.
Despite encouraging developments in the nuclear disarmament process over
the last years, the situation has not changed significantly. We are all still under the
pressure of thousands of nuclear weapons which can destroy all humanity on our
planet.
It is our strong conviction that total elimination of all nuclear arsenals is the
only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of such weapons.
There needs to be a halt to the modernization and upgrading of nuclear
weapons, or acquisition of new ones, to advance nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation.
Kazakhstan calls upon nuclear powers pledged that they would make sincere
efforts for the elimination of nuclear weapons in accordance with Article VI of the
NPT – to take practical steps in this field. Compliance to nuclear disarmament
should be adhered not only by States Parties of the NPT, but also by States that are
not Party to the Treaty.
Stagnation in nuclear disarmament continues, which in our opinion, is due
to the crisis of confidence in the international community. In recent years, there has
been a deep sense of frustration worldwide over the lack of progress in achieving
the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. Deliberations about disarmament have
lost a common focus. Considerations of immediate national interests have eclipsed
the pursuit of the common interest. We are seeing a wave of preconditions for
nuclear disarmament, rather than concrete results in achieving it. We have to admit
that luck of confidence is one of the great challenges before us. The “crisis of
confidence” in the field of disarmament has to be overcome. For that purpose, we
should clearly see our final goal and confirm our commitment to this goal.
Kazakhstan proposed to adopt within the United Nations a Universal
Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free-World. We consider it
as one of the means to foster political commitment of the world community to a
shared goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. The Declaration can remind the
world that, while disagreements may persist on ways to achieve it, there is no
dispute over the goal itself. It can serve as an aspiration for actions and promote
accountability in fulfilling disarmament commitments. It can inspire new efforts to
end the stalemates that have crippled the multilateral disarmament machinery. The
adoption of a UN Universal Declaration on the achievement of a nuclear weapons
free world will promote the advancement of the Convention on Full and Total Ban
of Nuclear Weapons.

Our initiative is supported by many countries and we will continue our
consultations with delegations in order to have it as a consensus document of the
United Nations General Assembly.
Mr. Chairman,
Catastrophic humanitarian and environmental consequences from nuclear
tests in Semipalatinsk – and from other nuclear test sites around the globe –
demonstrate that the aftermaths of any use of nuclear weapons are uncontrollable
in time and space. The world has learned much from the Conferences on
Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons held in Oslo and Nayarit,
Mexico, and my delegation welcomes the decision of the Austrian Government to
hold the third conference on this issue, thereby creating the greater momentum for
advocacy and resolute action.
Kazakhstan stands for the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT). A voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing observed
by the nuclear powers, though an important factor of nuclear security, cannot
serve as an alternative to a legally-binding document such as the CTBT.
We closely co-operate with the CTBTO to enhance the International
Monitoring System, through developing and refining our five national cutting-edge
24-hour tracking stations as part of the global effort.
We call on all UN Member States to make efforts to implement UN GA
Resolution (64/35) on the International Day against Nuclear Tests which is yet
another initiative of Kazakhstan to keep on a high alert the issue of nuclear
threat reduction. This year we will observe the fifth year of the resolution’s
adoption. It is symbolic that 2014 marks the 25th anniversary of the establishment
of the popular Nevada-Semipalatinsk anti-nuclear movement. It not only brought
the people of Kazakhstan together in their desire to eliminate the nuclear threat in
our own country, but also in the entire world. Reflecting the will of the people,
President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev closed the Semipalatinsk nuclear
test site by his own unilateral decree. To mark these historical actions of the
citizens of Kazakhstan, the Government will organize the International AntiNuclear Conference on 29 of August 2014 in Semipalatinsk
As you may be well aware, the ATOM project launched by Kazakhstan
in 2012, to further realize the above-mentioned UN Resolution, continues its
campaign of collecting signatures for a nuclear weapons test ban petition to be
forwarded to the heads of states possessing nuclear weapons, as well as, the
countries which have not joined yet the CTBT or NPT. We do believe that this
kind of action will mobilize the international community to take tangible steps,
and we call upon delegations to sign the on-line petition.
Thank you for your attention.

