As of April 28, 2017
Statement
by the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2017 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 1 Specific issues - Nuclear Disarmament
and other Provisions of the Treaty
Vienna, May 3-5, 2017
Mr. Chair,
We have stated a number of times in various international settings that possession
of nuclear weapons generates a threat of their proliferation as well as their accidental or
deliberately use. The existence of weapons of mass destruction is immoral and
contradicts international humanitarian law. Catastrophic humanitarian and
environmental consequences from nuclear tests in Semipalatinsk – and from other
nuclear test sites around the globe – proved that aftermaths of any use of nuclear
weapons are uncontrollable in time and space. Hence, Kazakhstan, as one of the
countries which voluntarily relinquished its nuclear arsenal and shut down the
nuclear test site in Semipalatinsk, remains a staunch supporter of the global
process of nuclear disarmament.
Over more than four consecutive decades the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons has been a fundamental and integral part of the
international security and nuclear disarmament process. Despite the Treaty's
potential, we have to admit that progress has been limited and does not meet the
expectations of the members of the world community.
Let me also note that Kazakhstan actively continues its endeavors aimed at
moving nuclear disarmament forward by hosting annual international conferences
in its capital - Astana. These events are marked with tangible results which can be
seen from their final documents calling on leaders of states to commit themselves
to their international obligations and agreements.
On 29 August 2016 Astana hosted the International Conference “Building a
Nuclear Weapon Free World” organised by the Parliament of Kazakhstan in
coordination with the “Parliamentarians for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament” (PNND).
Kazakhstan calls upon nuclear powers to pledge that they would make
sincere efforts for the elimination of nuclear weapons in accordance with Article
VI of the NPT - to take practical steps and effective measures.
Nuclear weapons possessing states remaining outside the NPT must join the
Treaty without any preconditions as non-nuclear states. We are convinced that
national interests and security of any state should not be at the cost of other peaceloving countries.

-2-

Mr. Chair,
It is our strong conviction that the time has come for an unconditional
implementation by the NPT States Parties of their obligations, as embodied in the
unity of the three basic elements, namely disarmament, non-proliferation and
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Yet the NPT was not successful in limiting the
number of nuclear weapon states outside its frame, so we must rectify this course
of events and negotiate a forward-looking multilateral, effective and transparent
universal agreement in the field of nuclear disarmament. To that end the
international community should concentrate efforts on elaborating political will
and bridge our differences to unblock the work of the Conference on Disarmament
which remains the only multilateral negotiating forum. The Conference has to
deliver according its mandate.
From our national perspective, particular attention must be attached to the
following steps, with no limits for their further extension:
a) to maintain existing moratoria against nuclear tests and actively seek an
earliest ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, particularly by the
remaining Annex II sates;
b) to halt any production or modernization of nuclear weapons where declaring a
database on all types and status of such weapons should be recognized as obligatory;
c) to declare a moratorium against the production of fissile materials used for
military purpose with a final end to achieve a total elimination of all weapons grade
fissile materials. Here again all states possessing and producing fissile materials should
declare all available data on such materials;
d) to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in security doctrines of nuclear states;
e) to intensify multilateral efforts to prevent arms race in outer space;
f) to commence meaningful work on a Nuclear weapons ban treaty. In this
context, I would like to note that adoption by Kazakhstan's initiative of the UN GA
Resolution on the Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a NuclearWeapon-Free World is considered as one of the means to facilitate our
advancement to early Treaty adoption.
Thank you.

