Statement
by the delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 1 Specific issues - Nuclear Disarmament
and other Provisions of the Treaty
Geneva, April 25, 2013
Mr. Chair,
We have stated many times from various international settings that possession of
nuclear weapons generates a threat of their proliferation or use by accident or
deliberately, existence of nuclear weapons is immoral and contradicts international
humanitarian law. Kazakhstan, as one of the countries which voluntarily
relinquished its nuclear arsenal and shut down nuclear test site in Semipalatinsk
remains a strong supporter of the global process of nuclear threat reduction.
We acknowledge a consolidating role of the Oslo Conference of March 2013
in achieving a total and unconditional elimination of all nuclear weapons - a noble
aim broadly supported by the majority of states.
Over more than four consecutive decades the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons has been a fundamental and integral part of the
international security and nuclear disarmament process. Despite the Treaty's
potential, we have to admit that progress in this dimension is low and does not
meet expectations of the members of the world community.
Kazakhstan actively continues its endeavors aimed at moving forward
nuclear disarmament by hosting annual international conferences, including
International Conference "From Nuclear test ban to a world free from Nuclear
weapons" in August 2012 in Astana and "Forum for a Nuclear-Free World" in
October 2011 in Astana. These events are marked with tangible results which can
be seen from their final documents calling on leaders of states to commit
themselves to their international obligations and agreements.
We commend the Russian Federation and United States for their bilateral
undertakings after the 2010 NPT RevCon, and urge all Nuclear-weapon States to
follow this example and to engage in the process of eliminating nuclear weapons
and to further reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally or through negotiation.
The lack of progress in unilateral basis, especially in implementing by
Nuclear-Weapon states of the Action Plan items devoted to nuclear disarmament is
indeed disappointing fact for many Non-nuclear-weapon states.

2

In this respect, Kazakhstan calls upon nuclear powers pledged that they
would make sincere efforts for the elimination of nuclear weapons in accordance
with Article VI of the NPT - to take practical steps and effective measures.
Those countries that remained outside the NPT must join the Treaty without
any preconditions as Non-nuclear-weapon state. My delegation is convinced that
national interests and security of any state should not be at the cost of other
countries.
Latest developments and challenges, especially on the background of our
failure to size the momentum in the field of nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, violations of the UN Security Council's resolutions on observing
moratorium on nuclear tests again vividly demonstrated urgent need for decisive
and concrete actions.
Mr. Chair,
It is our strong conviction that a time has come for an unconditional
implementation by the NPT States Parties of their obligations, as embodied in the
unity of the three basic elements - disarmament, non-proliferation and peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. Yet the NPT was not successful to limit the number of
nuclear weapon states outside its frame, we must rectify this course of events and
negotiate a forward-looking multilateral, effective and transparent universal
agreement in the field of nuclear disarmament. To that end the international
community should concentrate efforts on elaborating political will and bridge our
differences to unblock the work of the Conference on Disarmament which remains
a single multilateral negotiating forum. The Conference has to deliver fruits
according its mandate and derive from the success of the 2010 NPT RevCon.
From our national perspective, an Action Plan adopted by States Parties in the
2010 NPT RevCon encompasses many acute topics in disarmament track and,
meanwhile, a particular attention must be attached to the following steps, with no limits
for their further extension:
a) to maintain existing moratoria against nuclear tests and actively seek an
earliest ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, particularly by the
Annex II sates;
b) to halt any production or modernization of nuclear weapons where declaring a
database on all types and status of such weapons should be recognized as obligatory;
c) to declare moratorium against production of fissile materials used for military
purpose with a final end to achieve a total elimination of all weapons grade fissile
materials. Here again all states possessing and producing fissile materials would declare
all available data on such materials;
d) to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in security doctrines of nuclear states;
e) to intensify multilateral efforts to prevent arms race in outer space.
f) to commence meaningful work on a Nuclear weapons convention or package
of agreements as it was suggested by the United Nations Secretary-General in his
Five-Point Plan for Nuclear Disarmament. In this context, I would like to note that

3

Kazakhstan's initiative to draft a Universal Declaration of a Nuclear
Weapon-Free World within the UN is considered as one of the means to facilitate
our advancement to early adoption of a Convention.
Thank you.

