Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
CLUSTER 1: NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
OF THE FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2020
REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
VIENNA, 5 MAY 2017

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered by Indonesia on behalf
of the NAM States Parties to the NPT and by Sweden on behalf of the De-Alerting
Group.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
Malaysia continues to place nuclear disarmament as its highest priority. We
remain convinced that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only solution
against their possible use or threat of use. The goals of the disarmament pillar
should not be overwhelmed by the goals to be agreed upon under the other pillars of
non-proliferation and peaceful uses.
3.
My delegation expresses concern of the nuclear weapons modernisation
programmes undertaken by the Nuclear-Weapon States. Such programmes
undermine existing nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regimes, and could
derail efforts aimed at achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament.
4.
We often hear the argument that nuclear weapons serve as deterrence and
for security purposes. Recent events in the Korean Peninsula have escalated based
on such beliefs. Malaysia however is unconvinced of such arguments. We fail to
see how nuclear weapons could be an effective deterrence against rogue regimes
and non-State actors. While it is argued that such situations do not come about if
non-proliferation efforts are strictly enforced, the continued existence of nuclear
weapons only leads to some countries feeling that that they need to pursue them.
Hence, efforts leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons should remain a
priority task for the international community.

Mr. Chairman,
1

5.
Malaysia has consistently pursued the universal objective of general and
complete nuclear disarmament. We are strongly committed that this goal should be
achieved through the multilateral process. We also firmly believe that the complete
and total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only solution against the possible use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
6.
It is for this reason that Malaysia supports the United Nations Conference to
Negotiate a Legally-binding Instrument to Prohibit Nuclear Weapons, Leading
towards Their Total Elimination. Malaysia would also like to highlight that in 1997,
Malaysia and Costa Rica had jointly submitted a working paper on a Model Nuclear
Weapons Convention. This model convention seeks to prohibit the development,
testing, production, stockpiling, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear weapons
and on their elimination. Malaysia believes that both this instrument and the Nuclear
Weapons Convention are consistent with the thrust and spirit of Article VI of the
NPT.
7.
Malaysia welcomes the outcomes of the previous Nayarit, Oslo and Vienna
Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons. We are deeply
encouraged by the growing support on the humanitarian dimension of nuclear
disarmament. My delegation believes in the value and strong merit of highlighting
the need to prevent catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons,
through progress on nuclear disarmament, with the aim of total elimination of nuclear
weapons.
8.
My delegation also wishes to recall that we marked the 20th anniversary of the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons in 2016. This unanimous decision rendered by the Court
clearly stipulates, and I quote, “There exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and
bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control,” end of quote.
Mr. Chairman,
9.
Although the 2015 NPT Review Conference did not result in an agreed
outcome, an overall assessment of the implementation of the 2010 Action Plan is
important in determining how we approach the upcoming 2020 Review Conference.
Out of the 22 items that addresses nuclear disarmament and security assurances,
only some were partly fulfilled. Mostly were not. The credibility of the NPT lies with
the implementation of its past agreements and decisions. The lack of action on these
decisions will seriously jeopardise the future of the NPT.
10.
This Review Conference cycle gives us another opportunity to move forward
on nuclear disarmament. The targets that we set for the next Revcon need to be
ambitious. In this regard, we believe parallel multilateral processes should be a
catalyst to drive progress in NPT and should not be seen as overshadowing the NPT
Review cycle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

2

