Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. DATO' HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK
AT THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 1 (NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT) OF THE
FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW
CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS, VIENNA, 30 APRIL -11 MAY 2012

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the
NAM States Parties to the NPT and by Switzerland on behalf of the De-alerting Group. In

addition, my delegation wishes to make the following points.

Mr. Chairman,

2.

As early as 1946, the UN General Assembly in its resolution 1 (I) spoke about the

elimination of nuclear weapons. Yet sixty six years on, thousands of nuclear weapons
remain and this goal continues to be elusive. While Malaysia welcomes and recognises
the positive developments and the importance and role of unilateral and bilateral
arrangements such as the implementation of the New START Treaty between the Russian
Federation and the United States, as well as the plurilateral P5 engagements, we wish to
underscore the importance of the multilateral approach, as well as the principles of
irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in dealing with nuclear disarmament. This is
particularly so since the threat or use of nuclear weapons has direct impact on
international peace and security.

3.

As long as nuclear weapons are deemed necessary by some for deterrent and

security purposes, others would endeavour to .secure the same weapons on the very
same argument. Additionally there are credible fears that non-State actors may enter the
nuclear foray. Hence, efforts leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons should
remain on the priority tasks of the international community in its endeavour to realize a
nuclear weapon free world.

Mr. Chairman,

4.

An assessment on the security policies of the nuclear-weapon States reveals their

unshakeable reliance on nuclear weapons based on the doctrine of nuclear deterrence.
This position is further aggravated by the nuclear cooperation programmes that some of
them maintain with non-nuclear-weapon States, which include the deployment of nuclear
weapons in cooperating States. This is a clear violation of the NPT. It promotes nuclear
proliferation of another kind, and instability in that it would justify any nuclear-weapons
State's supplying nuclear weapons to its allies for similar strategic reasons.

5.

Against such a backdrop, Malaysia hopes that serious efforts will be made to give

substance to the action plan on nuclear disarmament of the 2010 Review Conference.
States Parties has to fulfil their respective obligations under the NPT in a transparent,
irreversible and verifiable manner. This is important in further building the much needed
trust and confidence, which are the key ingredient to progress in disarmament.

6.

It is therefore with deep dismay that we note the lack of any progress in the

Conference on Disarmament over the past fifteen years. The continuing impasse in the
Conference reflects the lack of serious commitment to the goal of the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons, as well as the other core issues before the Conference. In this
regard, we would reiterate our position that it is vital for the CD Member States to exercise
the much needed flexibility and political will so as to rejuvenate the stalled multilateral
negotiations towards a balanced and comprehensive programme of work without further
delay.

7.

Turning to the issue of nuclear testing, my delegation is encouraged by the

continued positive response by countries to sign and ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. We welcome the recent ratification of the Treaty by Indonesia and
Guatemala. We hope that this positive trend will solidify the norms against nuclear
proliferation and the further development of nuclear weapons and move us closer to the
goal of universalisation of the Treaty. Malaysia would strongly urge the remaining
countries listed under Annex II of the CTBT, to sign and ratify the Treaty, so as to effect its
entry into force as soon as possible. Pending the entry into force of the CTBT, it is
important to ensure that the current moratoria on nuclear testing will continue to be
observed, while exerting every effort to secure the universal endorsement of the Treaty.

8.

Malaysia is deeply concerned with nuclear weapons modernisation programmes

that are being undertaken by the nuclear-weapon States. Such programmes undermine
existing nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regimes, and are not a positive
example to non-nuclear-weapon States' signing and ratifying treaties and protocols to
restrict and control nuclear capabilities, which they do not even possess to begin with.
This eventually will deal a serious blow to the viability of the NPT and to the disarmament
process in general.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

