Mr. Chairman,
My delegation aligns itself with the statement of NAM States Parlies to the NPT and that of the delegation of Chile on behalf of the De-Alerting Group under this cluster. Through you Mr. Chairman I would also like to express my appreciation to the members of the civil society for their contribution to the discussion yesterday evening. Indeed we appreciate their refreshing ideas, valuable insight and commitment in supporting the inter-governmental process in moving to a world free of nuclear weapons. We hope for further-discussion enriched discussions with the civil society in our work leading towards the 2010 RevCon.
Mr Chairman,
I wish to briefly elaborate Malaysia's position on disarmament, non-proliferation and international peace and security relating to the Treaty :-
2.	Nuclear disarmament remains a high priority for Malaysia. Complete and total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only solution against the possible use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
3.	Malaysia welcomes the recent high-profile pronouncements made by nuclear weapon states, which has brought nuclear disarmament back to the forefront of the international agenda. However, Malaysia wishes to reiterate that reductions in deployments and in operational status cannot be a substitute for the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
4. Further to this, Malaysia calls for transparency in the reporting by nuclear-weapons States, in particular on their efforts of reducing the stockpile of nuclear arsenals. We see the reduction of nuclear arsenals by Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) as part of their obligation to the NPT, not outside of it. It should be quickly followed by similar steps towards total and complete disarmament.
5.	We look forward for other incremental efforts to complement the efforts of nuclear weapons reduction, including the early ratification and entry into force of the CTBT, continued moratorium on development of new nuclear weapons, the completion of a verifiable fissile material treaty as well as reducing the operational readiness of nuclear weapon systems.
6.	Malaysia acknowledges that efforts to achieve disarmament and non proliferation should move together, in parallel. Sadly, the emphasis has been more on non-proliferation, rather than disarmament. The previous Review Conferences heard a greater call of concern on non-proliferation non-compliance by NWS, ignoring the equal concern of disarmament non-compliance. The balance between the two concepts is a critical component of the NPT, which must be restored.
Mr. Chairman,
7.	The continued existence of nuclear weapons can never contribute to global security. The existence of nuclear weapons risks the world of their use, either by design or accident, and confronting this risk holistically can only be done by addressing proliferation concurrently with the reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons.
8.	The proliferation of nuclear weapons is driven by insecurity and the perception that nuclear weapons are crucial to ensuring security. The failure of NWS in fulfilling their NPT obligations and the double standards practised outside the NPT further fuels this insecurity. As such a deadly cycle persists - as long as nuclear weapons remain within defense doctrines of NWS, insecured non-Nuclear Weapons States (NNWS) will be tempted to develop such weapons.
9.	In connection to this Malaysia firmly believes that effective measures to protect NNWS against the use or threats of use of nuclear weapons would not only strengthen international peace and security but also positively contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Thus it is in the interest of the NWS to address the issue of negative security assurances(NSA) comprehensively.
10.	Malaysia is of the view that unilateral declarations by NWS to provide both positive and negative security assurances are inadequate to prevent the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against NNWS as such declarations could easily be withdrawn or changed. NWS need to go beyond unilateral voluntary offers of positive and negative security assurances.
11.	Pending nuclear disarmament, strengthening of NSA represents an important and achievable step towards the commitments undertaken by the NWS pursuant to Article VI of the NPT.
12.	Malaysia strongly believes in the establishment of nuclear weapon free zones (NWFZ) as a platform for the promotion of regional disarmament that could enhance the security of all states and ultimately contributing to international peace and security. NWFZ strengthens peace and security as it promotes greater transparency and dialogue among the States, eventually leading to the creation of an environment conducive to arms control, obliquely reducing the risk of regional conflicts.
13.	Malaysia has also been consistently supportive of the strengthening of existing, and establishment of new NWFZ towards attaining the objective of global nuclear disarmament. Of particular importance is the call for the establishment of a NWFZ in the Middle East, which Malaysia considers to be a matter of utmost urgency, in view of the volatility in that region.
Mr. Chairman
14.	We should strengthen our resolve and proactively work towards reinvigorating the multilateral process in pursuing the aims of bringing the NPT to a successful outcome. We hope that this PrepCom will be able to reach an agreement on a substantive outcome. The inability to do so would be a great setback, which would put the success of the 2010 RevCon at stake. As a first step, my delegation hopes that we would be able to resolve all procedural matters in a timely fashion, starting with the immediate agreement of the provisional agenda of the 2010 NPT RevCon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.