Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. AMBASSADOR HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS IN NEW YORK
AT THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 1 OF THE SECOND SESSION OF THE
PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE
TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statements delivered by Indonesia on behalf
of the Non Aligned Movement and by Nigeria on behalf of the De-Alerting Group. In
addition, my delegation wishes to make the following points.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
As early as 1946, the UN General Assembly in its first resolution spoke about
the elimination of nuclear weapons. Yet sixty seven years on, there are tens of
thousands of nuclear weapons that still remain. While Malaysia welcomes positive
developments such as the implementation of New START between the Russian
Federation and the United States, we wish to highlight that as long as these
horrendous and destructive weapons exist, the have-nots will also yearn for it. More
importantly, this will negatively impact the realisation of a world free of nuclear
weapons.
3.
There are credible fears that non-State actors may wish to obtain nuclear
weapons or materials. Hence, efforts leading to the total elimination of nuclear
weapons should remain the priority of the international community in our endeavour
to realize a nuclear weapon free world .
4.
Malaysia has always maintained a principled position on the general and
complete disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. In this regard, we are also
strongly committed that this goal should be achieved through the multilateral
process. Malaysia is already a party to the Biological Weapons Convention and the
Chemical Weapons Convention. While these two Conventions were negotiated and
finalised many years ago, we are disappointed at the resistance and reluctance of
some States to initiate and support a similar Convention on the complete and total
elimination of nuclear weapons. Malaysia firmly believes that the complete and total
elimination of nuclear weapons is the only solution against the possible use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Chairman,
5.
An assessment on the security policies of the nuclear-weapon States reveals
their unshakeable reliance on nuclear weapons based on the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence. This position is further aggravated by the nuclear cooperation
programmes that some of them maintain with non-nuclear-weapon States, which
include the deployment of nuclear weapons in cooperating States. This is a clear
violation of the NPT. It promotes nuclear proliferation of another kind, and instability,
in that it would justify any nuclear-weapons State in supplying nuclear weapons to its
allies for similar strategic reasons.
6.
The misguided assumption on the effectiveness of nuclear deterrence has
also led other States to join the nuclear arms race. Recent events in Northeast Asia
have escalated due to the strong but misguided belief that nuclear weapons are an
effective deterrent and imperative tool for the survival of a nation. We remain
unconvinced of such arguments, especially in the current security climate. Further,
we fail to see how the doctrine of nuclear deterrence could be effectively applied
against rogue regimes and non-State actors.
7.
Against such a backdrop. Malaysia hopes that serious efforts will be made to
give substance to the action plan on nuclear disarmament of the 2010 Review
Conference. We call upon the Nuclear-Weapons States to accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading up to nuclear disarmament as outlined in Action 5 of
the Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. States Parties are
required to fulfil their respective obligations under the NPT in a transparent,
irreversible and verifiable manner. This is important to further build the much needed
trust and confidence, which are key ingredients to progress in disarmament.
8.
It is therefore with deep dismay that we note the lack of any progress in the
Conference on Disarmament (CD). The continuing impasse in the CD reflects the
lack of serious commitment to the goal of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons, particularly on the four core issues that we have before us in the
Conference. To overcome this impasse, the CD would have to re-conquer its
relevancy as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the
international community. In this regard, we would reiterate our exhortation to the CD
Member States to further exercise the much needed political will and to agree on a
balanced and comprehensive programme of work without further delay.
9.
The current stalemate in the CD has led to other efforts outside of the
Conference to deal with nuclear disarmament. Malaysia is encouraged by the
positive developments at the recent First Committee of the UN General Assembly
with the resolution on the Open Ended Working Group in taking forward multilateral
disarmament negotiations, the resolution on the High-Level Meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament as well as the resolution on the establishment of
a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on a treaty banning the production of fissile
material.

Mr. Chairman,
10.
Turning to the issue of nuclear testing, my delegation is encouraged by the
continued positive response by countries to sign and ratify the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We hope that this positive trend will solidify the norms
against nuclear proliferation and further development of nuclear weapons. Malaysia
also strongly urges the remaining Annex II States to sign and ratify the Treaty, so as
to affect its entry into force as soon as possible. Pending the entry into force of the
CTBT, it is important to ensure that the current moratorium on nuclear testing is
being and will continue to be observed, while exerting every effort to secure the
universal endorsement of the Treaty. In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the recent
ratification of the CTBT by Brunei Darussalam and the Republic of Chad.
11.
We are also deeply concerned with the nuclear weapons modernisation
programmes that are being undertaken by the nuclear-weapon States. Such
programmes undermine existing nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regimes,
and do not contribute towards building confidence among non-nuclear weapons
States. It will eventually deal a serious blow to the viability of any disarmament
negotiating treaty in general.
12.
We believe that the only effective and sustainable way to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons is through the total elimination of nuclear weapons
by all those that possess such weapons. The concept and distinction of Nuclear and
Non-nuclear Weapons States is unsustainable and unjust. Over time, some will
begin to question the usefulness of these treaties and conventions and of their own
participation in them, which would eventually deal a serious blow to the viability of
the NPT and to the disarmament process in general.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

