Ms. Deborah Barker-Manase
Charge d'affaires a.i. & Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Marshall Islands to the United Nations
Friday, May 15 2015
Main Committee I: Draft Chairman’s Report
NPT/CONF/2015/MC 1/CRP 4
The Republic of the Marshall Islands appreciates the merged report and the tireless
efforts of H.E. Ambassador Laggner of Switzerland, Chair of Subsidiary Body 1, and
you.
Mr. Chair,
As a country, which has suffered from nuclear tests, we strongly believe that the
Conference must acknowledge that nuclear weapons can never be used under any
circumstances. Therefore, it is vital for the outcome document to convey the central
message of the joint statement delivered by Austria. We regret that strong references to
the unacceptable consequences of a nuclear weapon detonation, including its effects on
multiple dimensions, are not prominently featured throughout this text.
	  
Mr. Chair,
Similar to our colleagues’ concerns, we note and are concerned that the operative
paragraph 8 does not state the slow pace of the implementation of disarmament
commitments. We would insert slow before “pace.” We further request some clarity on
the phrase “as perceived by some state parties.” Consequently, the proposed text should
be: The Conference recognizes the slow pace of the implementation of disarmament
commitments, concerns over breaches of the Treaty’s obligations, and the lack of
universality undermine confidence in nuclear disarmament, nuclear nonproliferation, and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands is concerned about the current formulation of
paragraph 28. We request deletion of acknowledgment and replace it with expresses its
deep concern and remove “make every effort.”
Concerning Op 42 (1), the Republic of the Marshall Islands requests the insertion of any
circumstances in the second sentence. Thus, the sentence would be: The Conference
affirms that, pending the realization of this objective, it is the interest of the very
survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never to be used again, under any
circumstances.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands requests the Conference to recognize the necessity
for greater and accelerated efforts to implement Article VI of the NPT and relevant
frameworks through the specification of concrete benchmarks and timeframes. In this

vein, we welcome the language in OP 42 (6), but we propose the following change:
deletion of “that are designed.”
The Republic of the Marshall Islands requests the insertion of and eliminating after
substantively in OP 42 (7). Thus, the sentence would be: The Conference calls upon all
States concerned to continue to review their military and security concepts,
doctrines, and policies over the course of the forthcoming review cycle with a view
to reducing substantively and eliminating the role and significance of nuclear
weapons therein.
Concerning OP 42 (19), we welcome the references regarding the legal approaches to
elaborate the effective measures for the implementation of Article VI. However, we
propose some changes. We request the deletions of “encourages, engages, and
“disarmament machinery” and replace with calls, to begin, and within the framework
of the United Nations.” Thus, similar to suggestions from other delegations, the text
would be: The Conference calls on all states to begin, without delay, within the
framework of the United Nations, in an inclusive process, to identify and elaborate
effective measures for the full implementation of Article VI, including the legal
provisions required for the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chair,
My people’s experiences with the impact of nuclear weapons underpin my delegation’s
strong views that a legal framework must be established to achieve a world free of
nuclear weapons as reiterated by additional delegations.
We will submit additional comments to you.
Thank you.
	  
Report of Main Committee I:
Revised Draft Chairman’s Report (NPT/Conf.2015/MC.1/CRP.4/Rev.1)
Mr. Chair,
The Marshall Islands appreciates your tireless efforts on this revised report. However,
there are some essential points we wish to make.
Mr. Chair,
Compliance
Regarding pp. 7, the Republic of the Marshall Islands is deeply concerned about the
deletion of the phrase, “UN Charter.” We strongly believe that the UN Charter is the
overarching global instrument with respect to international peace and security, and in turn
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are fundamental to international peace and
security. Consequently, we urge the reinsertion of the reference to the UN Charter as
in the previous draft and the 2010 Final Document.
Nuclear Disarmament
Concerning the references to nuclear disarmament,
In the current version of PP6, the Republic of the Marshall Islands notes that there has
been a deletion of “at all times” from the reaffirmation of the strict observance of the
NPT’s provisions. We contend that "at all times" should be reinserted
We welcome the current text of pp 8. We appreciate the Chair’s recognition of the strong
views in the room about the current state of nuclear disarmament. We further welcome pp
9.
We take note of PP18’s formulation and are concerned about it. It can either be reworded
or deleted. PP18 is based upon the 1995 Principles and Objectives, which are referenced
in PP 16. Additionally, the current formulation highlights reductions in connection to
Article VI.
Concerning pp. 24, we propose that “conflagration” is replaced with the term
“detonation.” The Conference has focused on the wider impacts, not just those related to
war. Further, evidence, which was presented at the humanitarian conferences,
underscored the devastation of one single detonation. Moreover, we also have
reservations about the term, “conflagration.”
We welcome pp 25.

Concerning pp. 30, the overwhelming majority of States have shown “a growing interest
… in the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons” by
joining these statements, therefore, we are of the view that the paragraph must, at very
least, welcome the growing interest and must refer to the “overwhelming majority of
States”.
In terms of paragraph 32, the conference should welcome instead of notes the Austrian
Pledge.
ICJ Advisory Opinion
Regarding pp. 35, we would prefer it if the conference simply recalls, in its entirety, the
International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of
Nuclear Weapons issued at The Hague on 8 July 1996. Thus the phrase “in its entirety”
would be added.
References to Nuclear Weapons
The Republic of the Marshall Islands welcomes paragraph OP 1, but we would include
“under any circumstances” at the end of the paragraph to make the point crystal clear and
categorical.
We welcome op 2.
In OP3, the added reference to "way that promotes international stability, peace and
security and based on principle of undiminished and increased security" for all should be
deleted. The NPT provides no conditions for implementation of Article VI
While we welcome op7, this important paragraph would bear an important addition, to
read "with a view to reducing substantively and eliminating the role and significance of
nuclear weapons therein, [new language] and identifying specific milestones." While we
are not prescriptive as to the nature of these "milestones" the international community
deserves greater confidence and assurance, beyond generalized statements.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki
In terms of op. 18, the Republic of the Marshall Islands supports the text as proposed by
Japan regarding the importance of visiting Hiroshima and Nagasaki for the members of
the international community.
Disarmament and Framework

Regarding op. 19, we do not accept the current language. We request the deletions of
“encourages, engages, and “disarmament machinery” and replace with urges, to begin,
and within the framework of the United Nations.
Mr. Chair,
The Marshall Islands reiterates our concerns expressed at the opening of this NPT
Review Conference, that there may be different avenues towards achieving a world
without nuclear weapons – but our worst fear is merely continuing the status quo - seeing
no meaningful answer at all. Perpetuating the status quo, patting ourselves on the back
and expecting accolades for making zero progress at this NPT Review Conference is
totally unacceptable to all peoples and all nations. Surely we can, and must do better.
Thank you Mr. Chair

