Kingdom of Morocco
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Main Committee I I General Debate
Statement delivered by Mr. Bouchaib Eloumni
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Mission of the Kingdom
of Morocco to the United Nations in New York
04 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,

Let me first of all congratulate you for your election as Chair of the Main
Committee I and assure you of our delegation support and full cooperation.
Mr. President,

I would like to reiterate that Morocco, a party to all instrument related to weapons
of mass destruction, remains convinced that the security of all nations lies rather in
the peaceful coexistence, dialogue and mutual trust and not military power and the
accumulation of WMDs.
The NPT constitutes an important asset which allowed the international
community to lay the foundations of a multilateral nuclear consensus, based on a
delicate balance between the three pillars of the Treaty, in order to maintain
international peace and security.
In this regard, we consider that the Conference should arrive at an outcome that
reflects the following:
1.

The Conference should underlines that it is not acceptable any more that
nuclear weapons remain the only WMDs that are not prohibited by an
international instrument. The indiscriminate, devastating and irreversible
1/3

consequences of any use of nuclear weapons on the environment and human
lives compel us more than ever to advance collectively towards the
prohibition of those weapons.
2.

The Conference should also recall that the ultimate objective of the NPT is
the total elimination of nuclear weapons and to underline that further efforts
are required to achieve progress towards that objective. Beyond the
compromise language used in the treaty, the underlying consensus was to
prevent further spread of nuclear weapons in order to facilitate negotiation on
nuclear disarmament to free the world from such devastating weapons.

3.

The Conference should reaffirm that the starting point for any credible and
sustainable nuclear disarmament remains the fulfillment of existing
obligations and the implementation of agreed measures.

4.

The Conference should acknowledge that very limited progress has been
achieved in implementing the agreed disarmament measures in the 2010
review conference action plan.

5.

The Conference should reaffirm that all previously agreed measures,
including in 2010, remain valid and relevant and needs to be fully
implemented.

6.

The Conference should acknowledge the efforts made by nuclear weapon
states while insisting that, for example, the reductions in nuclear arsenals
should be more substantive and irreversible, and that they should be
implemented as part of the package of all agreed disarmament measures.

7.

The Conference should address the two following vital issues:
The first one is the time frame for implementing agreed measures. While we
agree that disarmament can only be a gradual and phased process, we
consider that the conference should envisage an indicative time frame that
would allow for assessment of progress. Without a time frame, the limited
measures agreed in 2010 would never constitute real steps or building blocks.
The second issue that the conference should address is the need for
verification. While welcoming transparency measures and information
provided by nuclear weapon state, the Conference should reaffirm the
importance of verification for disarmament to increase confidence, ensure
irreversibility and enhance the credibility of the process and the Treaty as a
whole.
No one has a magic solution for verification and we realize how sensitive and
complex this could be. However, it is importance to agree on the need for
verification and to start addressing this gap. As matter of fact, the non2/3

proliferation pillar comes with transparency and verification obligations. The
inalienable right to peaceful uses is subject to safeguards obligations. The
Safeguards regime of the IAEA and its Technical cooperation Program both
include financial obligations as well as verification and accountability for non
nuclear weapon states. There is no reason why Disarmament obligations and
commitments should not be verifiable.
There are different options before this conference. One of them could be to
form an open-ended working group to consider "measures of transparency
and verification in nuclear disarmament".
We hope that the Conference will launch a constructive dialogue on these
issues to which we remain willing to contribute.
I thank you.

3/3

