

Mr. Chairman, 
Since this is the first time I am taking the floor, may I congratulate you on your assuming the chair of this very important Committee. You can count on New Zealand's support for your efforts to achieve a substantive outcome. 
While a balance in accountability across all the Articles of the NPT is important and part of our mandate, central to it is the fundamental bargain of non-proliferation and disarmament. In many respects, and for many delegations, delivery of this bargain is accorded the highest priority. 
When New Zealand deposited its ratification of the NPT in 1969, we regarded it as a first but significant step towards nuclear disarmament. The bargain may be discriminatory, but it was premised on a commitment to negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament. And, explicit in this bargain, was the expectation that this discrimination would cod with the elimination of nuclear weapons New Zealand remains resolute in this position. 
We see this as a crucial Review Conference. What we achieve here in this Committee, and in the Conference as a whole, will be instrumental in determining that international confidence in the NPT can be sustained. It will also be the first test of confidence that its indefinite extension five years ago can be upheld. 
This Conference is crucial in another important respect. The 1995 Review Decision requires us to exercise a greater degree of accountability for our actions and efforts in fulfilling the Treaty's obligations. The extent to which we will be successful in meeting that requirement will be determined by the degree to which all of us - individually and collectively - can work for consensus outcomes that cross traditional alignments and positions. 
Mr. Chairman, it is important as we begin our work to remind ourselves of the political and legal frameworks to which we are accountable. 
First, it is explicit in the non-proliferation and disarmament bargain of the NPT that non-nuclear weapon states have both the right and the responsibility to pursue nuclear disarmament. Progress on nuclear disarmament will require a combination of further bilateral cuts, plurilateral involvement as well as multilateral efforts as appropriate. We do not ca I for the multilaterisation of the START process, but it cannot be argued that NPT States parties are, in some way, encoded from the process of nuclear disarmament. 
Moreover, when the NPT was indefinitely extended five years ago, that Decision did not in any way sanction the indefinite possession of nuclear weapons. On the contrary, the 1995 Principles and Objectives endorsed the goal of the elimination of nuclear weapons. Enhanced accountability, yes; permanence in possession, no. 
The NPT makes another important distinction, Mr Chairman. Progress on nuclear disarmament is not contingent on progress with general and complete disarmament. And, we need to remain mindful in this Committee that it is inherent in a Treaty based on mutual obligations, that no one group of states can determine independently the pace with which the obligations of a treaty are implemented. 
Mr. Chairman, we should also be alert to the political imperatives demanded of us. We do not accept, given developments in the last five years, that it is business as usual on nuclear disarmament it is not Strategies on the use and possession of these weapons continue to be re-rationalised. And, strategies to protect nuclear monopolies seem incapable of delivering the stability they are supposed to protect. 
Another political reality is that the liability of possessing nuclear weapons continues to increase as they exceed their design life. Are we not already witnessing a race for technology replacement? 
Mr. Chairman, nuclear weapons must not become an inevitable fact of life. The longer we retain them, the greater the temptation of others to acquire them. And, with that we are witnessing other responses with the potential to lead us into another arms race and new and more dangerous security configurations. 
Mr. Chairman, we very much welcome the recent ratification by the Russian Federation of START II. The START process is extremely important and we urge the United States and the Russia Federation to work for early conclusion of the next stage. But, even with these significant cuts, the destructive capacity of remaining nuclear inventories remains pernicious and beyond comprehension. We will still have weapons chasing targets rather than targets chasing weapons. 
Mr. Chairman, looking back over the last five years, there have been significant challenges to the Treaty - from within and from without. Having skirted around them in the last three PrepComs, we must now not only confront them, but deal with them substantively. 
This Committee must address the challenges posed by the nuclear tests in South Asia nearly two years ago. Those tests may not have weakened the NPT, but they did challenge the international non-proliferation norm we are all working for. They brought into sharp focus the reality that this Treaty is very close, but not yet close enough, to universality. 
It is essential that this Committee sends the strongest possible signal that demonstrations of nuclear capability do not confer status or can occur with impunity. We must reinforce the calls made, individually and collectively, for these two states to renounce the nuclear weapons option and to sign and ratify this Treaty unconditionally and as non-nuclear weapon states. We must also call upon them to sign and ratify the CTBT without delay. And, it is important that all NPT States parties support efforts for constructive dialogue to ensure there is restraint in the South Asia region. 
And, no less important, Mr Chairman is the requirement for us to address, in a meaningful way, another non-State party that operates unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. It is essential for the RevCon to call upon this State to accede to the Treaty and to place all its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. 
Within the NPT house, we have problems with non-compliance. These require our attention and a response that is effective and compelling. And, we must also confront the considerable inventory of unfinished business in the context of signatures and ratifications of existing instruments. 
Our immediate focus, Mr Chairman. must be on the three objectives set down in the 1995 Principles and Objectives Overall, the record has been more one of procrastination than progress. 
The one single multilateral achievement since 1995 has been the conclusion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty: a crucial goal for New Zealand. Despite the efforts of the first Entry into Force Conference of this Treaty last year, entry into force still eludes us, however. This is an immediate priority. It is one New Zealand actively continues to work for, as we have done consistently in the past as a lead sponsor, with Australia and Mexico, of initiatives in the United Nations General Assembly. 
This Committee and this Conference must send, therefore, a strong signal of our determination to bring this Treaty into force. Political commitment to the CTBT remains strong and the work of its Preparatory Commission is proceeding well. But, only political commitment to ratify will deliver on this new international norm. 
No less important for New Zealand is the conclusion of a viable fissile materials treaty. This is an essential next step and one that is ready for the taking. Unfortunately, work on this in Geneva has been taken hostage by calls for work on other issues in the Conference on Disarmament. 
It must be possible, we believe, to make a distinction between requests for equal treatment of issues in the Conference on Disarmament and engagement, when some issues are ready to move ahead and others need further deliberation. Can we not do both, without compromising the priorities which countries, individually or collectively, place on nuclear disarmament, fissile materials and outer space? In a body whose every move is constrained by consensus, no-one's security interests ale compromised. 
Another priority in our incomplete inventory is work on negative security assurances. This is also at a standstill. As we have noted before, some new creative thinking may be required in addressing this agreed goal. 
The unilateral assurances that have already been provided in Security Council resolutions are not regarded as constituting firm and legally-binding agreements. They were not negotiated and remain unverifiable. And, against the continuing re-rationalisation of the use of nuclear weapons, there are questions about the security benefits these unilateral assurances provide. 
If a new legally-binding instrument is to be a collateral measure in disarmament, then should this not require negotiation by all parties concerned? 
New Zealand has always regarded security assurances as part of the NPT "bargain", whereby non-nuclear weapon states, having forsworn the nuclear weapons option, should have the security of not being subjected, in any way, to a nuclear threat. 
Security assurances are one mechanism under which countries may uphold the customary law principles of proportionality and necessity cited in the ICJ Advisory Opinion. For New Zealand, a nuclear response to a non-nuclear attack can never constitute a proportional or necessary response. 
Mr. Chairman, we hope in this Committee that some further progress can be made in developing the conceptual underpinnings of security assurances by signalling a determination that negotiations should begin. One test of that commitment must be ratification by the nuclear weapon states of the Protocols to the various nuclear weapon-free zone treaties. 
Mr. Chairman, our work in this Committee, if it is to be credible, cannot confine its focus on what we have not been able to achieve. We are all aware of the deficit in performance with the programme of action since 1995. What we need now, at this Review Conference, is to inject a new political determination into the process. We do not believe this is a big ask for a Treaty that is central to non proliferation and disarmament. 
Mr. Chairman, we are required to look forward as well. We want to see, therefore, further and faster progress with the implementation of the START process. We want a clear signal of commitment at this Conference that the other three nuclear weapon states will join together in working for the elimination of their respective nuclear forces. And, we urge them also to continue to take unilateral measures in the meantime. 
There are other outcomes this Committee must address also. These include greater transparency and the principle of irreversibility of disarmament measures. And, we want to see an acknowledgment that other interim steps can and will be pursued. Central amongst these must be a review of nuclear doctrines, and not in the direction of expansion, as well as measures such as de-alerting. And, measures to reduce non-strategic weapons is a priority. 
The New Agenda working document before us addresses these essential forward steps. We urge all delegations to support the undertakings it seeks. 
Above all, Mr. Chairman. we are seeking at this Conference and in this Committee, to secure a new political undertaking for the total elimination of nuclear weapons that will be delivered by an undertaking to pursue this outcome through a determined and accelerated process of negotiations. 
We believe that current circumstances require this new political signal and that it must be given now. 
In seeking this new undertaking, I want to make it very clear that we are not questioning anyone's commitment to Article Vl. What we are seeking is a new undertaking, consistent with, but building upon, that given in the 1995 Principles and Objectives. 
As was noted in the New Agenda general statement, Mr. Chairman, this may be our last and best opportunity to move definitively towards the achievement of the goals of the Treaty and to deliver the security that the retention of nuclear weapons can never confer on humankind. 

