NEW ZEALAND

Statement by

H.E. Dell Higgie
Ambassador for Disarmament and Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the Conference on Disarmament , Geneva

at the

2

nd

Preparatory Committee of 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation

of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster I

Geneva, 26 April 2018

Page 2 of 4

Mr Chair ,
Important
anniversaries are often used as a time of
recommitment to the original event, or relationship, being
commemorated. When they mark anniversaries
a successful
event or relationship, they are an occasion for jubilation.

or

This year, in fact in a couple of weeks' time, it will be 50 years
since the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) was adopted. In 2020, it will be 50 years since its entry
into force. Half a century since its creation, the Treaty is
almost universally hailed as a success - the constitutive
document of a regime, conceived on the basis of mutual
benefit, which has successfully fended off the prospect of
unconstrained nuclear weapon proliferation.
A central aspect of the benefit which at least many non-Nuclear
Weapon States saw themselves as receiving from the Treaty's
'Grand Bargain' in 1968 was the disarmament undertaking the obligation to achieve progressively full nuclear disarmament
- assumed by Nuclear Weapon States in Article VI of the
Treaty.
Article VI was not included in the first drafts of the Treaty but
was inserted at a later point in the negotiations at the
insistence of a number of non-Nuclear Weapon States. Its
inclusion in the text proved a pivotal drawcard for many of the
95 states who voted in favour of the Treaty in the UN General
Assembly in June 1968. The same is true, no doubt, for at
least a number of the states casting positive votes in the UN
Security Council at the time.
Equally, its inclusion facilitated ratification of the Treaty by the
growing number of states who joined it over the following

Page 3 of 4

decades. In terms of New Zealand's domestic contract law,
then, we would describe Article VI as an essential part of the
'consideration' - the quid pro quo - lying at the heart of the
Treaty's contractual bargain.
Dissatisfaction with progress in meeting the terms of this
mutual contract proved most recently to be the mainspring for
the negotiation and adoption of a further treaty regulating
nuclear weapons - last year's Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons. The obligations included in that Treaty
supplement Article VI, and the object and purpose of the NPT,
but do not at all dislodge those of the NPT.
New Zealand's
commitment
to
the
NPT
continues
unabated. Our confidence that the occasion of the Treaty's
half-century is indeed cause for jubilation would be greatest,
however, if we felt that all States Parties had an equivalent
commitment to honouring a// the terms of the Treaty including, most notably, Article VI where implementation is
plainly lacking, and re-interpretation sometimes apparent.
Over the period of our fiftieth anniversary, culminating in 2020,
our NPT community must engage in renewed dialogue about
how it is that we can significantly advance implementation of
Article VI including in terms of the undertakings already given
by all States Parties in the 1995, 2000 and 2010 NPT Review
Conference outcomes.
A range of interim measures which the NPT membership could
usefully focus on to advance the disarmament pillar during this
review cycle have been presented in a number of Working
Papers put to this and to last year's Prepcoms and also in group
statements.

Page 4 of 4

Those put forward by the cross-regional groups to which NZ
belongs include calls from the New Agenda Coalition (NAC) to
direct increased implementation efforts at the range of already
agreed Review Conference outcomes from 1995, 2000 and
2010. The De-alerting Group's statement delivered by Malaysia
today calls for Nuclear Weapon States to reduce alert levels in a
concrete, measurable and timebound way and to report to
States Parties on measures taken to this end.
In the context of group positions supported by New Zealand, I
would wish to draw attention also to the Working Paper on the
Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons (HINW) and
to the related side event convened by the Austrian Government
here today. We are grateful for the cautionary opportunity this
event provides for us all to reflect again on the catastrophic
risk, and consequences, of any nuclear weapon detonation.
It is these risks and these consequences which remain the true
motivation for the international
community's
long-standing
pursuit of a world without nuclear weapons and I take this
opportunity to emphasise New Zealand's strong support for the
ongoing work of our civil society partners in pressing for
governments never to lose sight of these.
However we will need to make much better progress toward the
elimination of nuclear weapons, and the fulfilment of Article VI,
before we will have real cause for jubilation as we look back
over the past 50 years to the vision and leadership - and the
Grand Bargain - of the drafters of the NPT .

