•
•'

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Main Committee 1

4 May 2015
Statement by Mr. Sten Arne Rosnes
Director. Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Norway

Mr. Chairman,
The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NP1) is the foundation for the global non-proliferation regime
- and for our common goal of a world without nuclear weapons.

During this Review Conference, we must work constructively to produce a result that
strengthens the NPT and its three pillars.

It is necessary to focus our attention on positive developments.

Five years ago, the 2010 NPT Review Conference expressed its deep concern with the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons. The Oslo Conference on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons in March 2013, and the two following conferences
in Nayarit and Vienna, were successful; together they have raised awareness of the risks and
consequences of a nuclear weapon detonation - intended as well as unintended.

(Check against delivery)
Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations, 825 Third Avenue, New York, NY ioo22.
Phone: (212) 421-0828 Fax: (212) 688-0554 www.norway-un.org

"'f. --

I

The Joint Statement on the Humanitarian Consequences of Nuclear Weapons is a clear
manifestation of the importance of this perspective, with 160 states signing up to the
statement delivered by Austria's Minister of Foreign Affairs.

We have also underlined our appreciation of the participation by the US and the UK at the
Vienna Conference.

Norway has submitted a working paper on the Oslo Conference and its main findings, ref
NPf/CONF.2015/WP27. In the summary of the chair of the Oslo conference, three main
findings were identified:
•

It is unlikely that any state or international body could address the immediate

humanitarian emergency caused by a nuclear weapon detonation in an adequate
manner and provide sufficient assistance to those affected. Moreover, it might not be
possible to establish such capacities, even if it were attempted.
•

The historical experience from the use and testing of nuclear weapons has
demonstrated their devastating immediate and long-term effects. While political
circumstances have changed, the destructive potential of nuclear weapons remains.

•

The effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, irrespective of cause, will not be
constrained by national borders, and will affect states and people in significant ways,
regionally as well as globally.

Another important working paper on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons has also
been submitted. This paper raises several important topics. One such topic is the fact based
humanitarian perspective on nuclear weapons. The paper also underlines that: "the
compelling body of evidence that has been represented to the international community since
the last NPf Review Conference in 2010 has served to heighten awareness of the scale and

•

extent of the consequences and thus the risks that will persist until nuclear weapons are
eliminated."

We expect a clear commitment to the humanitarian perspective on nuclear weapons in the
outcome of this conference. The outcome should also reflect the important contribution from
civil society and NGOs, whose efforts we value greatly. The three conferences on
humanitarian consequences will be presented at a side event on 6 May, co-hosted by
Norway, Mexico and Austria.

Mr. Chairman,
The UK-Norway Initiative on Nuclear Warhead Dismantlement will continue as a crucial
part of our efforts to fulfil Article 6. Hence, UK and Norway have submitted a working paper
on the Initiative, and will be hosting two side events during this Rev Con.

We warmly welcome the launch of the International Partnership on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification (IPNDV). Norway will chair the next plenary meeting of the partnership this
autumn.

Finally, I would like to draw your attention to a new working paper submitted by the five
Nordic countries on nuclear disarmament, eloquently described by my Swedish colleague
earlier today.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

