NEW ZEALAND

Statement by

H.E. Dell Higgie
Ambassador for Disarmament and Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the Conference on Disarmament, Geneva

atthe

2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster One

New York, 4 May 2015

Check against delivery

Page 2 of 3

Mr Chair
Please accept my warmest congratulations on your appointment and to assure you of the
full support of the New Zealand Delegation. My Delegation, of course, strongly supports the
statements already delivered by the NAC and the De-alerting Group as well as the Statement
delivered earlier this morning by Austria introducing WP 30 on the Humanitarian Impact of
Nuclear Weapons.
Mr Chair, you, like us, will have heard during last week's General Debate the repeated
observation that the NPT is now at a turning point. We all heard, as well, many references
to the diminishing credibility of the Treaty's Grand Bargain.
No one here can be ignorant of why this is so - many, many voices spoke last week to
emphasise the insufficiency of progress on nuclear disarmament - on Article VI. No doubt
we will hear much more detail on this in the coming weeks as we, in this Committee, review
the progress that has been made since the last Review Conference in implementing the
Action Plan - its 22 action steps relating to nuclear disarmament - which was agreed at our
2010 meeting. We expect, of course, to hear, too, expressions of gratitude for what has
been done in recent years in terms of reductions in the overall numbers of nuclear
weapons.
All of us here - as supporters of our regime - will want, above all, not to imperil our
Treaty. The NPT has delivered significant benefit to us all - especially in terms of
constraining horizontal nuclear proliferation - and we must preserve its viability and its
integrity.
When faced with a turning point, one thing should be very clear, Mr Chair. One never
survives a turning point by doing nothing, by preserving what has been the status quo. It is
doing nothing which will imperil our regime.
It will be the responsibility of us all, as we meet in this Committee's Subsidiary Body, to chart
the course - the pathway - for our future work to reinforce the standing and bona fides of
our Treaty. For New Zealand - and our fellow members of the New Agenda Coalition - the
way through the turning point in our Treaty's credibility is very clear.
We look back at the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference: it records that the
Conference affirmed that "all States need to make special efforts to establish the necessary
framework to achieve and maintain a world without nuclear weapons" (emphasis
added). Such a framework, Mr Chair, necessarily will need to involve legally-effective
measures: measures that, under international law, set the rules and the prohibitions to be
followed by us all if we are to achieve a nuclear weapon-free world. Anything less would be
just another political declaration - not something legally-binding - and not, therefore, a truly
"effective measure" for nuclear disarmament.

Page 3 of 3

Opinions have differed regarding the point at which it is necessary to start the conversation
regarding legally-effective measures. Opinions differ about whether legally-effective
measures are best tackled piecemeal or comprehensively. But there can - or should not be
- any question about whether a legally-binding instrument is needed to achieve the promise
of nuclear disarmament in Article VI.
At this turning-point in the life-span of our Treaty, it is time to reframe and widen the key
issues under discussion here. It is time now to focus on specific proposals to elaborate the
legally-effective measures required to achieve comprehensively, and to maintain, a world
without nuclear weapons.
In WP 9, the NAC has put forward two legally distinct approaches capable of implementing
Article VI: the negotiation of a stand-alone agreement, or of a series - or framework - of
agreements. Either of these two pathways would advance implementation of Article VI and
would certainly be fully compatible with the object and purpose of the Treaty.
New Zealand looks forward to an exploration in this Committee's Subsidiary Body of the
legal approaches capable of advancing "effective measures''. We do so with added urgency
given the compelling and unassailable evidence that has emerged over the last several years
regarding the risks, and catastrophic humanitarian impact of, any nuclear weapon
detonation. This evidence highlights the urgent need for the full implementation of
obligations and undertakings under the NPT and its Review Conferences - and in particular of
the full implementation of Article VI.
Accordingly, we look to this Review Conference to take decisions to advance "effective
measures" and to follow this up in all disarmament forums, as well as in the General
Assembly. We must now move forward on the legally-effective measures leading to nuclear
disarmament which will move us through this turning point and preserve our Treaty and its
Grand Bargain.
Thank you Mr Chair.

