NEW ZEALAND
Statement by

H.E. Dell Higgie
Ambassador for Disarmament

at the

2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster I

Vienna, May 2017

Mr Chair,
The statement which we delivered here earlier this week during the General
Debate conveyed New Zealand's hope that the NPT membership would prove
able to take decisive steps forward during this new NPT review cycle - most
notably in making progress on the disarmament obligations of Article VI of the
Treaty.
Next year, it will be SO years since the NPT was adopted. In 2020, it will be SO
years since its entry into force. It would be difficult to think of a better way in
which to celebrate the half century of the Treaty's existence than by ensuring
that the current review cycle is able to mark significant advances in
implementation of Article VI.

As was noted by the New Agenda Coalition

(NAC) earlier this week, the very best way to protect the NPT - to enhance its
good standing and preserve its vital role in preventing the proliferation of
nuclear weapons - is to implement it. Implementation of the disarmament
pillar has long lagged behind implementation of the Treaty's other two pillars.
The most recent statement given by New Zealand under the disarmament
cluster, cluster one, of the

NPT was at the Treaty's 2015

Review

Conference. Our voice was just one of the many there that expressed concern
at the diminished credibility of the Treaty and its Grand Bargain as a result of
the insufficiency of progress on nuclear disarmament. New Zealand and many
others called for action to remedy this in order to reinforce the standing and
bona fides of our Treaty.
In 2015, we pushed for progress on transparency and reporting by the Nuclear
Weapon States, for recognition of the humanitarian consequences of nuclear
weapons, and for progress in lowering the launch readiness of nuclear
weapons. And, together with our colleagues in the New Agenda Coalition
(NAC), we put forward options for the elaboration of legally-effective measures
for a nuclear-free world pursuant to Article VI. The NAC's proposals on this
issue built on the call in the Final Document of the successful 2010 Review
Conference for "special efforts to establish the necessary framework to
achieve and maintain a world without nuclear weapons".

I am confident, Mr Chair, that the fact that our 2015 meeting was unable to
reach agreement on an outcome is not in itself seriously detrimental to the
NPT. After all, in its nigh-on 50 years there have been quite a number of failed
Review Conferences. Our Treaty will take the 2015 outcome in its stride and
look to renewed success at the 2020 Review Conference provided that States
Parties are able to see tangible progress on implementation of Article VI.
The legal framing for a nuclear weapon-free world is now being carried
forward

in

negotiations

conducted

under

UN

General

Assembly

auspices.

Efforts to negotiate legally-effective measures must continue,

however, also in the NPT context. A range of other, interim, measures which
the NPT membership could usefully focus on to advance the disarmament
pillar during this new review cycle have been presented in a number of
Working Papers put to this Prepcom and in group statements.
Those put forward by the cross-regional groups to which NZ belongs include
calls from the NAC for a diminution in the role that nuclear weapons play in
military doctrines and for reporting on this; and for increased awareness of the
risks and catastrophic impact of any nuclear detonation. The De-alerting
Group's statement calls for the

implementation of previously agreed

commitments on de-alerting and for rapid reductions in operational readiness
of nuclear weapon systems. It also calls on the nuclear weapon states to
report on their efforts to this end.
In the context of group positions supported by New Zealand, I would wish to
draw attention also to the Humanitarian Initiative on Nuclear Weapons (HINW)
and the side event on that which is being held here next week. We are grateful
to the Austrian Government for organising this event - and for the opportunity
it provides to reflect again on the catastrophic reality of a nuclear weapon
detonation. It is this which remains the true motivation for the international
community's long-standing pursuit of a world without nuclear weapons.
We hope that it will indeed prove possible during our Treaty's 50th anniversary
review cycle to make real progress toward this long-standing goal.
<>

