PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
1st Meeting of the Preparatory Commission of the NPT
2-12May 2017
Cluster 1: Nuclear Disarmament

Mr. Chair,
We seem to have veered off the path that we had set out to take towards nuclear
disarmament. Instead of working to eliminate them, nuclear weapons and their delivery
systems continue to be developed and modernized. Nuclear weapons continue to play
a prominent role in the military defense doctrines. And we see with horrifying frequency
tests of nuclear weapon delivery systems, demonstrating that the threat of nuclear
weapons is a clear and present danger.
These circumstances should reawaken the resolve of the community of nations to
renew and intensify its efforts to realize the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
The Philippines, along with some 120 Member States of the United Nations, stepped up
to the challenge by participating in the first session last March of the UN conference to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading to their total
elimination. This unprecedented meeting – open to all states, with the participation of
civil society, the culmination of years of work to comprehend the devastating effects of a
nuclear detonation to humankind – is a resounding call for the urgent need to secure the
world from nuclear weapons, especially given the present geopolitical realities. We
believe that a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons is complementary, and not contrary, to
the objectives of the NPT. It will strengthen the NPT, not undermine it. It will not
supplant the NPT, but reinforces its goals and objectives.
The spirit that drives the prohibition treaty is the same one behind Article VI of the
NPT, which we, the States Parties to the treaty, expounded into practical approaches in
the 64-point action plan. The plan lists in clear and unequivocal terms the actions that
States Parties, in particular nuclear weapons possessor States, must undertake in order
for this body to make meaningful progress in its work on nuclear disarmament.
We wish to highlight in particular the following:


For nuclear weapon States to accelerate with renewed urgency and earnestness the
reduction and elimination of all types of nuclear weapons with transparency, and
further diminish the role of such weapons in their military and security concepts,
doctrines and policies;



For nuclear weapon States to extend to non-nuclear weapon States effective,
universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory and irrevocable legally binding
assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;



For nuclear weapon States to accede to nuclear weapon-free zones, in particular the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and its relevant protocols, without
reservations;



For the establishment of a nuclear weapon free-zone in the Middle East on the basis
of arrangements freely arrived among States in the region concerned;



For the remaining Annex 2 States, in particular those who are not yet States Parties
to the NPT, to accede to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty without delay
and effect its entry into force; and



For nuclear weapon States to support the ongoing work towards the negotiation of a
legally binding instrument banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear
weapons and other nuclear explosive devices.
Mr. Chair,

This year marks the 20th anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone or SEANWFZ. The Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, which the Philippines chairs this year, considers
the SEANWFZ its most important contribution to the global aspiration of a nuclear-free
world. For the Philippines, SEANWFZ stands as a testament to its conviction that as
long as nuclear weapons exist, there remains the risk of accidental, mistaken,
unauthorized or intentional nuclear weapon detonations, exposing humanity and the
environment to their catastrophic effects. We are convinced that ultimately, the total
elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against their use or threat
of use.
SEANWFZ and other nuclear weapon-free zones all over the world stand as a
somber reminder to the community of nations that at this minute, the goal of eliminating
nuclear weapons still remains beyond our grasp. The arsenal of nuclear weapons in
existence today still numbers in the thousands -- a staggering figure, given that even if
only one is detonated, whether by accident or on purpose, the consequences to
humanity and the environment are catastrophic.
Just two weeks ago, the disarmament machinery at the United Nations witnessed a
breakthrough when the United Nations Disarmament Commission Working Group on
conventional weapons successfully negotiated an outcome document containing
“Recommendations on practical confidence-building measures in the field of
conventional weapons,” which was adopted by consensus. While modest, the success
was nevertheless significant because it broke the nearly two decades of coma that has
stricken the disarmament machinery.
More importantly, it demonstrated that
multilateralism can indeed achieve its objectives if delegations work together in the spirit
of flexibility, professionalism and mutual respect, underpinned by a strong political will to
make progress. The Philippine delegation hopes that this spirit will pervade this review
cycle of the NPT. After all, we – every single delegation in this room – are united by
one aspiration, and that is a world free of nuclear weapons.

Thank you.

