Please Check Against Delivery

PHILIPPINES
STATEMENT

2 nd

Delivered by
Ambassador H.E. Mme. Maria Cleofe Natividad
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the UN IAEA
and other International Organisations in Vienna
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
23 April to 4 May 2018, Palais des Nations, Geneva

Cluster 1: Nuclear Disarmament
Mr. Chair,

1. As a State Party to the NPT, member of the NAM and the NPDI, the Philippines
attaches a high priority to the nuclear disarmament pillar of the NPT.

2. In the so-called grand bargain that underpins the NPT, the onus remains, as has
been since the treaty was first created, with the nuclear weapon states to eliminate
their nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapon states must honor their end of the bargain
and deliver on them without further delay and with no conditionalities.

3. The path towards realizing the goal of nuclear disarmament has been agreed in
the 13 Practical Steps and the 64-Point Action Plan. What is needed is to take the
next steps forward. We would like to cite some of these action points:

I.

Nuclear Weapon

States

must make meaningful

progress in their

commitment under the treaty to reduce and eliminate all types of nuclear

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITEDNA TlONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEY;\
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel: (+41) (0) 22 716 1930 •E-mail: mission@genevapm.ph

Please Check Against Delivery

weapons in a transparent manner, and further diminish the role of such
weapons in their military and security concepts, doctrines and policies;

II.

Nuclear weapon states must extend to Non-Nuclear Weapon States
effective, universal, unconditional, non-discriminatory and irrevocable
legally binding assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons;

Ill.

Nuclear weapon states must support the ongoing work towards the
negotiation of a legally binding instrument banning the production of fissile
material for use in nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices.

IV.

The eight remaining Annex II States must sign and ratify the CTBTwithout
further delay and usher in its entry into force;

V.

Nuclear weapon states must accede to nuclear weapon-free zones,
including the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and its relevant
protocols;

VI.

The establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones is encouraged.
NPT States Parties pay particular attention to one in the Middle East.

Mr. Chair,

4. During this review process, it is important take stock of the collective efforts of
States Parties within the UN and relevant multilateral frameworks to achieve
progress on these action points. All efforts at the global and regional level on these
action points are mutually-reinforcing and they strengthen the Treaty.

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC Of THE PHlLIPPINES TO THE UNITED NATIO N S
AND OTHER TNTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIO N S IN GENEVA
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel: ( +41) (0) 22 7 l 6 1930 •E-mail: mission@genevapm.ph

Please Check Against Delivery

5. Last year, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, was adopted in line
with Article VI of the NPT. To date, fifty eight (58) States have signed it, and 7 have
ratified it.

6. In August last year, ASEAN Foreign Ministers reiterated the region's commitment
to preserve the Southeast Asian region as a Nuclear Weapon · Free Zone and free
of all other weapons of mass destruction as enshrined in SEANW-FZ Treaty and the
ASEAN Charter. They also reaffirmed the commitment to continuously engage the
Nuclear Weapon _States and intensify ongoing efforts of all Parties to resolve all
outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Treaty.

7. The Philippines recognizes the contributions of the civil society, NGOs such as
ICAN, scientists, scholars, and think-tanks including UNJDIR to the discourse on
nuclear disarmament. With their tireless efforts, they have established an epistemic
community that provides the backbone for our pursuit of a world free of nuclear
weapons. Sustaining a public discourse that is duly informed by different
perspectives and fields of expertise is important because we confront very difficult
and complex questions in nuclear disarmament.

Mr. Chair,

8. The wealth of working papers in this Session to promote systematic and
progressive action under this cluster, including, among others, on negative security
assurances, de-alerting, verification and safeguards, manifests the enthusiasm of
Parties to explore next steps that we can all support. My delegation associates itself
fully with the NPDI and its working papers.

9. We encourage

constructive discussions

around practical and concrete

proposals. We should ensure that such discussions will be sustained throughout
MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED NA TlONS
AND OTHER lNTERNATIONAL ORGANI ZATIONS IN GENEV A
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202Geneva, Switzerland .Tel: (+41)(0)22 716 1930 •E-mail: mission @genevapm. ph

Please Check Against Delivery

the Review cycle, and will become more focused in the run-up to 2020. We will
support

efforts the Chair,

in coordination

with the Chairs

of PrepCom 1

and PrepCom 3, in this regard.

Mr. Chair,

10. The Philippines shares the concerns by other delegations that nuclear weapons
capabilities of the NWS continue to be modernized and developed, in direct
contradiction of commitments under the NPT. We regret the renewed affirmation
among some nuclear weapons states of the role of nuclear weapons in their
defense and military doctrines.

11. We earnestly reject the notion that the work of nuclear disarmament may have
to slow down until the environment is ripe for it, that we must first create the
conditions
weapons.

that

would

be

conducive

to

the

elimination

of

nuclear

Implementing the NPT is a matter of collective responsibility and must

not be made conditional on the interests of a few.

12.The only guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and
against their grave humanitarian consequences, is their total elimination. We have
agreed previously to steps towards this end, and we are all obliged to keep moving
forward.

MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPTNESTO THE UNITED NATIONS
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS IN GENEY A
47 Avenue Blanc, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland • Tel: (+4 1) (0) 22 716 1930 •E-mail: mission @genevapm.ph

