Statement by Mr. PARK Chul-min
Deputy Director-General for International Organizations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Korea
The Third Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Nuclear Disarmament and Security Assurances
(Cluster I Specific Issues)
2 May 2014
New York

<Check against Delivery>

Thank you, Mr. Chairman,

As we work towards our shared goal of creating a world without nuclear weapons, it is the
solemn responsibility of all NPT State Parties, but in particular the nuclear weapon states, to
fulfill their obligations under the NPT by implementing the 2010 Action Plan. The brunt of the
responsibility for nuclear disarmament falls squarely on the shoulders of the two major nuclear
weapon states. In this context, my delegation appreciates the recent announcement by the United
States on the implementation plan of the New START, and looks forward to an agreement on
further reductions between the United States and Russia. My delegation also encourages other P5
countries to redouble their on-going efforts to follow the suit of the US-Russia example.

The P5 Conference process has made modest but notable progress through its regular
consultations in enhancing transparency and mutual confidence. We welcome the P5’s reports in
accordance with 2010 action plan as in the agreed framework. We hope to see further
developments, such as the submission of a glossary of key nuclear terms to the 2015 NPT
RevCon. Creating a common terminology among nuclear weapon states will provide a useful
yardstick for assessing warhead dismantlement efforts and will be helpful for peer verification
among the P5.
Mr. Chairman,
My Government values the Conference on Disarmament (CD) as the single standing multilateral
forum for disarmament. However, we are deeply concerned about the now almost two-decadelong stalemate in the CD. It is, without a doubt, time for Members of the CD to constructively
engage in the discussions with greater flexibility, if we are to revitalize the work of the CD. In
this vein, I anticipate that the Informal Working Group on a Programme of Work recently re-

established in the CD will produce a meaningful outcome of its activities, leading to the adoption
of the Programme of Work.

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation believes that the negotiation of a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty (FMCT) is the next
logical step on the road towards a world without nuclear weapons. The UN Group of
Governmental Experts (GGE) held its first two-week session which embarked on substantive
discussions. We hope that the GGE will function as a catalyst for the negotiation of an FMCT and
lead to speedier future negotiations through a preliminary advance review of the main elements of
the Treaty.
The early entry into force of the CTBT is crucial to strengthening the nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation regime. Continuing nuclear tests by North Korea highlight the urgency of the
Treaty in place. My delegation calls upon those states that have yet to ratify the CTBT, in
particular the eight remaining States listed in Annex II, to do so without further delay. We also
hope that a valuable contribution by the Group of Eminent Persons who have a wealth of
experience and expertise will serve to facilitate the entry into force of the Treaty.
In conclusion, my delegation takes note of a series of significant multilateral nuclear disarmament
initiatives, such as the conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons and the OpenEnded Working Group and so forth. We hope that such initiatives will have a positive and
constructive effect on the discussions on the nuclear disarmament agenda within the NPT
framework.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

/End/

