Statement b
The Republic of orea

&

At

The First Session of the Preparator Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on t e Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Z

30 April - 11 May 2012, Vienna

Nuclear Disarmament (Cluster I)

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation is of the view that the three pillars of the NPT

-

nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-

proliferation, and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - should be promoted in a mutually reinforcing
manner, and that maintaining a delicate balance between them is vital to the credibility and viability of the
NPT re,'olme.

Nevertheless, since nuclear weapons continue to pose the most destructive threat to mankind, nuclear
disarmament is crucial for reducing the threat of nuclear war and the unimaginable consequences that
would follow. Nuclear disarmament, by nature, offers a master key for both unlocking and securing the
NPT regime's potential effectiveness, which is itself a cornerstone for global peace and security. It is not
an option, but rather a duty for all NPT parties, in particular the nuclear weapon states. to fulfill their
obligation under Article VI of the Treaty and undertake negotiations on effective measures leading to
nuclear disarmament.

Mr. Chairman,

We recognize that significant progress has been made thus far, both unilaterally and bilaterally, especially
by the two major nuclear powers, in reducing their nuclear arsenals. We also appreciate the ongoing
efforts made by other nuclear powers. However, given that a wide gap in perception still exists between
nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states, it is hard to maintain that nuclear disarmament has
been as successful as we had hoped. To narrow this perception gap, we believe that nuclear weapon states
must demonstrate a higher standard of compliance through sustainable nuclear disarmament measures.
While nuclear weapon states must do their part by making real progress on nuclear disarmament, nonnuclear weapon states must faithfully observe their commitment to non-proliferation.

In this context, we welcome the recent developments in the area of nuclear disarmament such as the entry
illto force of the New START treaty between the US and Russia and the implementation of transparency

measures by the nuclear weapon states. These developnlents laid important ground work for the success
ofthe 2010 NPT Review Conference which adopted the Final Document by consensus for the first time in
a decade. The success of 2010 Review Conference contributed to the strengthening of international
nuclear disarii~ament and the non-proliferation system and further encouraged a virtuous, mutually
reinforcing circle of efforts.

Mr. Chairman,

In our common effort to realize a world without nuclear weapons, it is imperative to take a key step with
the in~plementationof the 2010 NPT Action Plan in order for the 2015 Review Cycle to succeed. In this
sense, my delegation encourages the P-5 countries to keep up the momentum of the follow-up meetings of
the P-5 countries in Paris in July last year to discuss how to implement the Action plan such as
transparency measures. Within the action plan on nuclear disarmament, the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) is vital. We welcome Indonesia's ratification of it in
February this year and call upon those States that have not yet ratified this Treaty, in particular the
remaining eight Annex 11 States, to ratify it without delay. We also stress the importance of maintaining a
moratorium on nuclear testing until the CTBT has entered into force.

Furthermore, the negotiation of an FMCT is indispensable not only for nuclear non-proliferation, but also
for nuclear disarmament. My delegation believes that the early commencement of negotiations on an
FMCT in the CD(Conference on Disarmament) is the next logical step toward a world without nuclear
weapons. The C D is an essential vehicle for the implementation of the 2010 NPT Action Plan, but its
decades-long stalemate prevents it from playing an important role in nuclear disarmament. It is high time
for member states of the CD to answer the calls of the international community, including those of UN
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon that urge the CD to begin working by adopting program of work.

Mr. Chairman,

We hope that the 20 15 Review Conference will set a milestone for nuclear disarmament and revitalize the
NPT based on what we achieved in the 2010 Review Conference. To achieve this goal, it is necessary for
all of us to reflect upon the implementation of the Action Plan over the past two years and find a realistic
and practical path toward a world free of nuclear weapons. This is exactly what needs to be done at this
first NPT PrepCom meeting.

Thank you /Endl

