Statement of Romania
at the 2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster I
(Viena, 2 – 12 May 2017)

Mr. Chairman,
Excellences,
Distinguished delegates,

Romania fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I w
Romanian strongly believes that the NPT remains the cornerstone of the
disarmament regime and is fully committed to a world without nuclear weapons.
This common ultimate goal could be achieved only collectively, in an appropriate
progressive process that is respective to the security challenges and commitments of
all NPT States Parties and could only happen when the international security
environment is encouraging it.
Any effort must be conducted in the framework of the NPT, with the participation of
all States Parties, and its real impact on the existing structure of the international
security must be carefully evaluated, bearing in mind the need to avoid unrealistic
expectations that will damage both the NPT and our shared goal of a nuclear
weapons-free world.
Meanwhile, let us continue to shape the necessary mutual trust and confidence
among all states to disarm, building on those initiatives that are consensual and

deliver concrete, tangible results that contribute to nuclear disarmament in a process
more likely to be successful and sustainable.
We must take stock of the progress achieved so far and be forward-looking. Let us
focus on common ground to advance building blocks in our shared goal of a world
without nuclear weapons, like progress of the FMCT negotiations, nuclear
disarmament verification and the urgent entry into force of the CTBT and the
completion of its monitoring system.
It has been a great honor for Romania to preside over the Preparatory Commission of
the CTBT in 2016, the year of its 20th anniversary. Last June, ministers and other
high officials of the Signatory States met here in Vienna to express support for the
entry into force of the Treaty 20 years since it was opened for signature. Once in
force, the Treaty would contribute effectively to the prevention of the proliferation of
nuclear weapons in all its aspects, to the process of nuclear disarmament and
therefore to the enhancement of international peace and security. We have to finish
what we started, against the backdrop of more DPRK’s nuclear and ballistic tests in
the recent past, and worrying signals about the future.
Mr. Chairman,
The success of the 2017 Preparatory Committee, and ultimately, of the 2020 Review
Conference depends on us – the States Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty. While we should not fear the differences of opinion, we must bear in mind
that a positive outcome of our meeting will show true political will in dealing, in a
balanced and comprehensive manner, with all the tree pillars of the NPT. This way,

together, we should be able to manage properly a successful beginning of the 20152020 review cycle.
In conclusion, I would like to assure you once again of Romania’s commitment to
support you in your endeavors to achieve a successful outcome of the first session of
the Preparatory Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

