

Mr. Chairman,
Colleagues,
The issues of nuclear disarmament are high on the agenda of the NPT review process.
Our country is committed to building a world free of nuclear weapons. Russia has
already made an unprecedented contribution to nuclear disarmament by having
decreased its nuclear arsenal by more than 85%.
Russia has fully complied with its commitment to reduce strategic offensive weapons
in accordance with the New START Treaty between Russia and the US. Russia’s
aggregate potential of strategic arms is even below the limits for warheads and
delivery means established by the Treaty.
Unfortunately, we cannot confirm that the other Party to the Treaty has also reached
the set limits. The figures declared by the US have been reached not only by actually
reducing the arms, but also through manipulations that are incorrect from the point of
view of the Treaty. Specifically Washington has unilaterally removed from the
accountability under the Treaty 56 Trident II SLBM launchers and 41 B-52H heavy
bombers by declaring them as converted. However, the so-called conversion has been
conducted in such a way that Russia cannot confirm its results as it is specified in the
New START Treaty. Moreover, the US has not included into the accountability under
the Treaty several ICBM ‘silo training launchers’ by renaming them in ‘training
silos’. Such deviation is also not allowed by the Treaty.
Thus, there is a serious anomaly that needs to be eliminated. Otherwise, a threat to
the viability of the Treaty will persist. The work on that issue will continue within the
Bilateral Consultative Commission under the New START Treaty. We will seek to
ensure strict implementation of the New START Treaty by the US side.
The Treaty itself continues to operate and contributes to predictability and stability of
our strategic relations with the US Russia remains strongly committed to the New
START Treaty.
We reaffirm our commitment to the INF Treaty. We share the concerns voiced by a
number of states regarding the future of the Treaty. However, it seems that only few
of them know the real state of play. The U.S. continues to reproduce its
unsubstantiated allegations. While the fact that the US has been severely violating for
many years the INF Treaty and trying to justify its intention to destroy it by shifting
responsibility on Russia is being silenced. We would like to believe that chances to
save the INF Treaty are still there and the U.S. will be strong enough to show
political will needed.
Mr. Chairman,
The Russian Federation has unilaterally implemented a whole number of other
significant measures. In particular, we have decreased fourfold the number of our
non-strategic nuclear weapons. All such remaining arms were converted into nondeployed and were concentrated exclusively within the national territory at

3

centralized storage bases, where the strictest regime of control and security is
ensured. Another step in that area has been our national decision to de-target Russian
nuclear weapons that now have a so-called zero flight assignment.
The role of nuclear weapons in Russia’s Military Doctrine has been seriously
reduced. Their possible use is limited only to following extraordinary circumstances:
the use of WMD against Russia or its allies and a hypothetical situation when
aggression against our country threatens the very existence of the State. In other
words, these are provisions of a purely defensive nature. A concept of “non-nuclear
deterrence” was also included in Russia’s Military Doctrine.
Mr. Chairman,
Colleagues,
We believe that further progress in nuclear disarmament is possible only if necessary
efforts are made by all the interested states. Steps in that area should strengthen and
not undermine international security and stability. The realistic approach to nuclear
disarmament, based on the NPT, entails phase-by-phase approach and mandatory
engagement of all states with military nuclear capabilities. That’s why it is impossible
for Russia to support the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. This
document controversial by nature has not been agreed with us. We respect the views
of those who have put forward this initiative. At the same time, it is obvious that the
Treaty which has been developed without participation of nuclear states or without
taking into account their views cannot make any positive contribution to the
reduction or limitation of nuclear weapons. It is based on the false premise that
nuclear disarmament can be carried out without taking into account strategic realities.
The text of the Treaty has been prepared in a hasty manner, on a non-consensus basis
and without taking into account the fundamental principles of the NPT.
The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons has not yet entered into force but
the work on it has already provoked a sense of hostility and discord within the global
community. These tendencies continue to deepen. Further advancement of the Treaty
threatens to undermine long-term efforts aimed at real nuclear disarmament. The
Treaty can cause irreparable damage to the integrity and sustainability of the
established nuclear non-proliferation system based on the NPT. The Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons can undermine efforts to ensure the entering into
force of the CTBT.
Raising the issue of complete prohibition of nuclear weapons in a short timeframe
would be appropriate at the final stage of the nuclear disarmament process to assure
the irreversibility of the results achieved. Today it only distracts attention from the
utterly unacceptable global security situation with accumulation of serious and much
more relevant problems. Let us mention just some of them. They include unrestricted
deployment of global missile defence systems, development of non-nuclear highprecision strategic offensive weapons, prospects of placement of strike weapons in
outer space, growing quality and quantity imbalances in the field of conventional
arms, worsening prospects for the CTBT.

4

Particular attention needs to be paid to destabilizing efforts of certain countries who
seem to believe that ensuring their own security does not require taking into account
considerations of other states on that matter. Active steps need to be taken to counter
attempts to destabilize the disarmament architecture and undermine the authority of
international organizations and regimes established with the approval of almost entire
global community.
In this context there are serious concerns about development in some countries of
doctrinal documents envisaging significant increase of the role of nuclear weapons in
military planning and lowering the threshold for its use. Another source of concern is
the continuing NATO practice of nuclear sharing when non-nuclear states practice
handling nuclear weapons in direct violation of the NPT provisions. All of that
increases the risk of a nuclear conflict with all the catastrophic consequences.
In order to avoid the most dangerous scenarios in a situation of serious escalation of
global military and political tensions and preserve strategic balance, we had to take
military and technical measures announced by the President of the Russian
Federation on March 1st, 2018 in his Address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian
Federation. We emphasize that all steps to strengthen the defence capabilities of our
country are strictly in line with the existing arms control treaties. We do not threaten
anyone and do not intend to use our potential for any aggressive purposes.
To stress once again, this is a matter of ensuring our security and preserve the
balance. At the same time Russia’s President called to sit at the negotiations table and
think on the renewed and perspective international security system.
History teaches us that attempts to strengthen one's own security at the expense of the
security of others are doomed to fail. A conversation is needed in which the notions
of equality, mutual respect and consensus are of instrumental rather than declarative
nature. This is the only approach that helps find a balance of interests satisfactory for
everyone and ensure due consideration of key issues of global security, as well as
create conditions for advancement towards nuclear disarmament. We are ready for
such conversation.

