SLOVAKIA

Statement of
Ambassador Fedor Rosocha
Permanent Representative of Slovakia
to the United Nations Office
and other International Organizations
in Geneva

at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster I: Nuclear Disarmament

Geneva, 25 April 2013

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC TO THE
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE AT GENEVA
9, chemin de l' Ancienne-Route. 1218 Grand-Saconnex • Tel: (022) 747 7400 . Fax: (022) 7477434

Mr. Chairman,
Since this is the first time my delegation is taking the tloor at the current session of the
Preparatory Committee, may I start by congratulating you on your assumption of the
chairmanship of this Committee's session and by wishing you all the success in your
endeavors in steering this body. My delegation is looking forward to your leadership and
I would like to assure you of Slovakia's support.
Slovakia fully associates with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to stress few comments that are of particular interest to my
delegation.

Mr. Chairman,
My country is fully committed to creating a safer world for all of us. Disarmament, and in
particular nuclear disarmament, is an important tool that can get us closer to this goal.
Since the process of disarmament affects the vital security interests of all states, they
must all actively contribute to the measures of disarmament, which have an essential play
in maintaining and strengthening international security.
Non-proliferation and disarmament instruments available to the international community
are an important part in strengthening international security architecture. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) lies in the very center of such a
landscape. It remains a unique and irreplaceable framework for maintaining and
strengthening international peace, security and stability.

Mr. Chairman,
At the 2010 Review Conference we have adopted the Action Plan, including the
reaffirmation of the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States "to accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament, contained in the Final Document
of the 2000 review Conference, in a way that promotes international stability, peace and
undiminished and increased security". The actions in the plan related to nuclear
disarmanlent have been viewed as important steps to advance this process towards a
world free of nuclear weapons. To confirm the importance of the Action Plan, we all
must now work towards its full implementation. It is the only way how we can build trust
across the whole non-proliferation reginle. We must not fail in order to prevent
undermining the credibility of the NPT process. If we do then we may face erosion of
confidence among States Parties.
In advancing nuclear disarmament, we should work towards a framework, which would
be based on and reaffirm a commitment for total elimination of nuclear weapons and

2

Mr. Chairman,
Slovakia supports the outcomes of the 2010 NPT Review Conference on Middle East.
We regret the postponement of the Conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction planned in 2012
as agreed at the 2010 NPT Review Conference. We fully support Facilitator Ambasador
Laajava of Finland in his efforts and preparations for a successful conference with the
participation of all States in the region. We hope that it will be possible to convene the
conference as soon as possible this year. At the same time, we are of the view that despite
of the postponement of the conference, which has been one of key outcomes of the 2010
NPT Review Conference, we should continue working and advance on the
implementation of the 2010 Action Plan.
We also pay due attention and seriously consider the humanitarian impact of nuclear
weapons. The 2010 Review Conference of the NPT expressed "deep concern at the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons". There would
be no single country that could address it alone. This issue extends discussions on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. The international conference on humanitarian
impacts of nuclear weapons held recently in Oslo has been an example of it.
We must work together to prevent the use of nuclear weapons, whether deliberate or
accidental. That is why we continue to support the process that would lead to the total
elimination of nuclear arsenals, including the reasons for their existence thus eliminating
effectively the above threat.
In light of nuclear disarmament challenges and difficulties, we must prevent building new
nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

4

