SLOVAKIA

STATEMENT
by
H. E. Mr. František Ružička
Permanent Representative of Slovakia
to the United Nations

at the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster I: Nuclear Disarmament

2 May 2014
New York

-Check against delivery-

Mr. Chairman,
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to stress few comments that are of particular interest to my
delegation.

Mr. Chairman,
Disarmament, and in particular nuclear disarmament, is an important tool that can help us to
create a safer world for all of us. Since the process of disarmament affects the vital security
interests of all states, they must all actively contribute to the measures of disarmament, which
have an essential play in maintaining and strengthening international security.
Slovakia is of the view that in advancing nuclear disarmament we should work towards a
framework of mutually reinforcing legally binding instruments, which would create
conditions for achieving and maintaining a world free of nuclear weapons.
Slovakia together with other countries has submitted the working paper on "Building Blocks
for a World without Nuclear Weapons". We believe that effective disarmament will require
mutually reinforcing building blocks that are multilateral, plurilateral, bilateral as well as
unilateral. A focus on such an approach foresees the possibility of parallel and simultaneous
measures.
In this regard, Slovakia continues to support immediate commencement of the negotiation on
a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices.
This issue has been long overdue. If we are serious about nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation, we cannot delay further the negotiations on this treaty. We do not see it as
an isolated step but rather well placed in a comprehensive framework of mutually reinforcing
instruments that would underpin a common and universal commitment to a world free of
nuclear weapons. Elimination of nuclear arsenals is, indeed, an integral part of such a world.
An ambition of a fissban treaty must aim at achieving its contribution to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. We need put together necessary building blocks to create conditions for
achieving and maintaining it. We need to do it properly.

Mr. Chairman,
The Conference on Disarmament (CD) has been for a long time valued and recognized as a
multilateral channel for strengthening international security.
However, a continued impasse of this body is unacceptable and unsustainable.
Ongoing stalemate in the Conference and stagnation in strengthening and moving forward
norms on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation endangers global security environment
and especially the disarmament landscape, including the non-proliferation regime.
1

Efforts to prevent an erosion of the landscape lead to searching new ways and available
avenues. In looking at new possibilities and opportunities we should make sure that we find a
path, which would support and add to a shared desire of a world free of nuclear weapons. It
should strengthen rather than weaken the global non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
Revitalization of the CD and its negotiation role is in a vital interest of non-proliferation
regime and the NPT as its cornerstone.
The CD has re-established the Informal Working Group on a Programme of Work and
adopted a schedule of activities for this year's session. We welcomed these two decisions,
although, we would have preferred to start negotiations in the Conference. We hope there will
be a value in these initiatives. They must aim at developing the issues further with a view to
future negotiations.

Mr. Chairman,
The issue of humanitarian consequences of the use of nuclear weapons is certainly an
important element of a complex discourse on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
which includes humanitarian and security considerations. It attracts attention and inspires a
number of actors, including those from civil society. The discussion on humanitarian impacts
will continue later this year in Vienna, Austria.
My country continues to support a process that would lead to the total elimination of nuclear
arsenals, including the reasons for their existence. Slovakia believes that achieving this goal
would need a substantive and constructive engagement of nuclear armed states. Their
participation is crucial if a ban should deliver concrete desirable results as the ban itself may
not guarantee elimination of nuclear arsenals.
The 2010 Review Conference of the NPT expressed “deep concern at the catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons”. Nobody can afford such kind of
catastrophe to happen. There would be no single country that could address it alone.
Humanitarian dimension certainly underpins the Treaty and adds to reasons why we need to
move the NPT process forward.
We need to work towards full implementation of the 2010 Action Plan in order to build trust
across the whole non-proliferation regime and to progress in all its areas, including nuclear
disarmament.
In this regard, Slovakia welcomes a submission of the reports of the nuclear weapon states on
their implementation of the NPT. We look forward to studying them in detail, in particular
those submitted pursuant to the action 5 of the 2010 Action Plan.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

2

