Statement of the delegation of Slovakia in the Main Committee I
of the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Mr. Chairman,
Let me begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the chairmanship of this
Committee. I wish you all the success in your endeavor and I assure you of my
delegation support.
Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to add a few comments in my national capacity.
Mr. Chairman,
As Slovak Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and European Affairs Mr.
Lajcak already stressed in his statement in the general debate, Slovakia considers
nuclear disarmament as a key pillar of the NPT. Since the process of disarmament
affects the vital security interests of all states, they all must actively contribute to it, in
order to maintain and strengthen international security.
Slovakia, in accordance with the goals of the NPT, takes an active part and fully
supports achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear weapons that would be
based on the principle of undiminished security for all.
However, we are concerned that the recent tensions in Europe have been accompanied
by increased references to possible role of nuclear weapons. That is why we should
seek to downgrade the role of nuclear weapons in security strategies and defense
doctrines, which would accompany reductions of nuclear arsenals.
Mr. Chairman,
Growing attention has recently been put to a humanitarian issue related to nuclear
weapons. Indeed, humanitarian impact of the use of nuclear weapons is an important
element of complex discourse on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, which
includes both humanitarian and security considerations.
In working towards the prevention of the use of nuclear weapons, we must also focus on
drivers behind nuclear weapons. Slovakia continues to support a process that would
lead to the total elimination of nuclear arsenals, including the reasons for their existence.
We believe that in advancing the process aimed at creating and maintaining a world free
of nuclear weapons we need a substantive and constructive engagement of nuclear
armed states. Their participation is inevitable if the nuclear arsenals are to be eliminated.
Without a proper engagement of relevant players any ban may not, in general,
automatically guarantee desired achievements.

Mr. Chairman,
As we have already stressed on many occasions, Slovakia believes that in making
progress on nuclear disarmament we need to work towards a set of legally binding
instruments, which would underpin a commitment for the total elimination of nuclear
weapons.
In view of this, Slovakia continues to support immediate commencement of negotiations
on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices.
We share the views that such a treaty would offer a unique opportunity to create a nondiscriminatory regime with equal obligations for both nuclear and non-nuclear weapon
states. It would also enhance nuclear material security thus enabling us to strengthen
further our common efforts to prevent such material falling into hands of terrorists. A
fissile material treaty would clearly reinforce the global non-proliferation regime based on
the Non- Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and at the same time complement the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).
We believe that such a treaty would contribute to making practical progress towards
achieving a world without nuclear weapons and on non-proliferation in all its aspects.
Indeed, a treaty should be based on the principles of transparency, irreversibility and
verification. We should work towards maximizing the non-proliferation and disarmament
value of this instrument. Such a treaty would be well placed in a comprehensive
framework of necessary building blocks.
We are of the view that setting strict preconditions for negotiations with an aim to define
their scope and to prejudge their outcome cannot bring us closer to commencing such
deliberations. On the contrary, only real negotiations can show which issues and in what
way can be addressed in the negotiations thus generating a desired outcome.
In this regard, we recognize a value of the work of the Group of Governmental Experts,
which significantly contributes to preparation for future negotiations on a fisban treaty.
We commend Ambassador Golberg of Canada for her leadership of the Group and
appreciate her briefing on the outcomes of the Group presented to this Committee. We
are looking forward to reading the full report on the GGE work.
Slovakia supports the recommendation that the Review Conference should reaffirm the
need to commence negotiations of a treaty banning the production of fissile material for
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices without delay preferably in the
Conference on Disarmament.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman

