Statement by the Republic of South Africa during the Cluster 1 Nuclear
Disarmament and Security Assurances Debate during the Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons
26 April 2018

[Check against delivery]
Thank you, Chairperson,
South Africa wishes to associate itself with the statement by the Non-Aligned Movement
on the issue of security assurances.
At the outset, my delegation wishes to place on record that a call for negative security
assurances should not be perceived as any sort of recognition for the continued
possession of nuclear weapons .
It is, instead, a pragmatic, interim and practical measure aimed at strengthening the
non-proliferation regime and the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world .
South Africa's view on the provision of legally-binding security assurances to States that
have foregone the nuclear weapons option under the NPT is based on the belief that it
would not only enhance the security of non-nuclear-weapon States under the Treaty,
but also strengthen the non-proliferation norm. South Africa firmly believes that the
continued possession of nuclear weapons increases the possibility that these weapons
could be used, or fall into the hands of terrorists . As we have stated many times in the
past , the only complete defence against the threat posed by these weapons remains
their complete elimination and the assurance that they will never be produced again.
Chairperson,
Because the NPT is the primary international legal instrument under which the nonnuclear-weapon States have foregone the nuclear weapons option , it follows that
security assurances should be provided under the NPT. The granting of legally-binding
security assurances to the non-nuclear-weapon States under the NPT would fulfil one of
the NPT's core bargains to States that have foresworn the nuclear-weapons option . The
provision of security assurances within the context of the NPT would not only provide a
benefit to the NPT non-nuclear-weapon States , but could also serve as an incentive to
those who remain outside the Treaty .

Chairperson,
It is argued by some that the security assurances granted under United Nations Security
Council Resolution 984 of 1995 are adequate for the purposes of the non-nuclearweapon States. In addition, it is argued that the existing nuclear-weapon free zone
treaties provide a forum for the nuclear-weapon States to reinforce existing security
assurances . However, the 1996 International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion and the
2000 Review Conference Document make it clear that security assurances should be
granted in the context of the NPT. Consequently, the qualified assurances provided
under nuclear weapon-free zone treaties are not sufficient.
Together with the Members of the Non-Aligned Movement, South Africa has therefore
often expressed the conviction that, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
efforts should be pursued for the conclusion of a universal, unconditional and legally
binding instrument on security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States.
Chairperson,
It is a well-known fact that the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament" adopted at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference
recognised that steps need to be considered to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
party to the NPT against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons which should take
the form of an internationally legally binding instrument. Furthermore, the Final
Documents of the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences reflect the agreement of States
Parties that unequivocal and legally-binding security assurances by the nuclear-weapon
States to the non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT would strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Chairperson,
In South Africa's view, it is not acceptable for non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the
NPT to continue to be concerned and threatened by the possible use of nuclear
weapons against them. Nevertheless, these concerns persist.
The nuclear-weapon States claim to be committed to the politically-binding security
assurances that have been granted to the non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the
NPT. If this is indeed the case, it begs the question as to why they still continue to
oppose the conclusion of legally-binding assurances . This is an issue that is long
overdue. A legally-binding instrument that would provide security assurances to the
non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT would strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime and confirm the importance and role of the NPT.
I thank you

2

Thank you, Chairperson ,
South Africa associates itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the African Group and the New Agenda Coalition. To this, I wish to add a
few additional remarks in my national capacity .
Chairperson ,
My delegation continues to believe that nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation are mutually reinforcing processes and therefore progress in respect of both
is essential to realise the object and purpose of the NPT. We are therefore concerned
over the lack of significant progress on nuclear disarmament and the tendency by some
States to select and focus on preferred provisions of the Treaty .
Our own experience has shown that neither the possession, nor the pursuit of nuclear
weapons can enhance international peace and security. The idea that nuclear weapons
provide some sort of an ultimate security guarantee only serves to weaken arguments
against proliferation and the development of nuclear weapons by those who tend to use
the very same arguments to justify their decision to pursue nuclear weapons .
During the last few years we have continued to witness attempts by some States to
negate and reinterpret the nuclear disarmament commitments made since the 1995
Review and Extension Conference . Together with modernisation programmes and
deterrence arguments, this has continued to polarise the nuclear non-proliferation
regime.
Chairperson ,
As long as nuclear weapons exist, and vertical and horizontal proliferation persists, the
threat to humanity will remain. The only way to eliminate this threat is to eliminate all
nuclear weapons . Article VI of the NPT makes it clear that nuclear disarmament is an
obligation on all States Parties. It is therefore a shared responsibility of all States to
1

prevent any use of nuclear weapons, to curb their proliferation and to achieve nuclear
disarmam·ent.
The adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) through an
inclusive multilateral process within the United Nations framework therefore reflects the
concerns of the international community with regard to nuclear weapons . This Treaty
represents the highest non-proliferation standard that any State can commit to, thereby
strengthening and complementing the NPT. This was also the reason why it was
acknowledged by the Nobel Peace Committee in 2017.
South Africa's support for the Treaty is without prejudice to the realization of existing
nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments , including those agreed to in the
NPT context and other partial measures , such as the entry-into-force of the CTBT, and
a treaty banning the product ion of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices .
Chairperson ,
We firmly believe that the goals of the NPT can never be achieved if it is seen only as a
means to protect the perceived security concerns of a few countries . This is not only
illogical, but also lacks credibility. The indefinite retention of nuclear weapons on the
basis of the perceived security interests of a few States comes at the expense of the
rest of us. Such justif ications merely encourage proliferation, contradict nuclear
disarmament obligations and commitments , and ultimately undermine the NPT.
Nuclear weapons are inhumane weapons , and it is inconceivable that their use could
ever, under any circumstances , be consistent with international law, particularly
international humanitarian law. South Africa has always emphasised the humanitarian
imperatives that underpin our search for a world without the threat posed by the
possession , use and proliferation of these weapons. These considerations must be at
the core of all deliberations , actions and decisions on nuclear weapons.
It is therefore regrettable that vast public resources are still being diverted towards the
modernization of nuclear weapons , whilst basic human needs in many developing
countries cannot be met. The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and
their delivery systems provide a clear indication that some of the NWS continue to
harbour aspirations for the indefinite retention of these instruments of destruction,
contrary to their legal obligations and commitments .
Chairperson,
The 2010 NPT Review Conference not only reconfirmed the continued validity of the
outcomes of the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences, but also included an extensive
Action Plan aimed at accelerating the implementation of all Treaty provisions under the
three Treaty pillars. Urgent action is required to fully implement the commitments and
undertakings entered into at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences. South Africa
2

believes that concrete progress on these solemn undertakings is essential to the
success of the 2020 review cycle .
In this regard , we continue to believe that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones (NWFZs) constitutes an important disarmament and non-proliferation measure
and therefore support the establishment of new zones, including in the Middle East, but
also in other regions such as Europe. In this regard, we note that the TPNW also
provides an opportunity for those States that are not located in nuclear-weapon-free
zones to join an instrument that expresses total opposition to nuclear weapons .
Chairperson,
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) remains an important element of the
set of mutually-reinforcing instruments aimed at accomplishing our common goals of
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. Pending its entry into force, we urge all
nuclear-weapon States to observe their moratoria on nuclear testing and not to undertake
any actions that would undermine the CTBT. We believe that the CTBT's entry into force
would enhance the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime and strengthen
the role of multilateralism in arms control and international security.
The CTBT was the last Treaty to be negotiated at the Conference on Disarmament.
However , since then the CD has fallen into a prolonged stalemate . We believe that the
impasse in the CD undermines its credibility and raises questions about the
Conference's continued relevance . The CD was established for the purpose of
conducting multilateral disarmament negotiations. Anything short of this objective
means that the Conference is not executing its mandate .
In conclusion Chairperson,
We dare not become complacent about the threat posed by nuclear weapons and the lack
of full implementation of the disarmament obligations flowing from Article VI. States Parties
must respect the Treaty and the outcomes of its Review Conferences to maintain the
continued vitality of this important legal instrument. Measurable progress, in particular on
nuclear disarmament, must therefore remain our goal and a major determinant in achieving
- and in sustaining - international peace and security.
I thank you, Chairperson .

3

