Mr. Chairman,
My delegation is also of the view that the three pillars of the NPT - nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - should be promoted in a mutually reinforcing manner, and that maintaining a delicate balance between them is vital to the credibility and viability of the NPT regime.
Nevertheless, since nuclear weapons continue to pose the most destructive threat to mankind, nuclear disarmament is crucial for assuaging the threat of nuclear war and ensuring the survival of mankind. Nuclear disarmament, by nature, offers a master key for securing the NPT regime's effectiveness, which is itself a cornerstone for global peace and security. As UN Secretary General Mr. Ban Ki-moon mentioned in his "Five Point Proposal" on nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in September last year, it is not an option, but rather a duty for all NPT parties, in particular the nuclear weapon states, to
fulfill their obligation under Article VI of the Treaty and to undertake negotiations on effective measures leading to nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Chairman,
We recognize that significant progress has been made thus far in nuclear arsenal, unilaterally and bilaterally, especially by the two major nuclear powers. We also appreciate the ongoing efforts made by other nuclear powers. However, given that a wide gap in perception still exists between nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states, it would be hard to maintain that nuclear disarmament has been as successful as we hoped. To narrow this perception gap, we believe that nuclear weapon states must demonstrate a higher standard of compliance through sustainable nuclear disarmament measures. I firmly believe that voluntary deeper cuts by nuclear weapon states will grant them greater moral authority and political legitimacy to demand non-nuclear weapon states to join them in strengthening non-proliferation norms. Also, my delegation strongly believes that in order to rekindle the global effort for nuclear disarmament, it is of utmost importance to restore trust and nurture a spirit of cooperation between nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states. Non-nuclear weapon states must faithfully observe their commitment to non-proliferation, while nuclear weapon states must do their part by making real progress on nuclear disarmament.
In this context, we welcome President Obama's recent speech on nuclear disarmament in Prague. The concrete steps enumerated and the expressed willingness to strengthen the NPT as a basis for cooperation not only clarified his vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, but also brought us hope of overcoming the 10-year stalemate in multilateral disarmament. We also welcome the Joint Statement by President Medvedev and President Obama early last month regarding Negotiations on Further Reductions in Strategic Offensive Arms. We believe that the decision by the two Presidents to begin negotiations for a new, comprehensive, legally binding agreement to replace the START Treaty is a significant precursor to jump-start a new nuclear disarmament era. We hope that the two countries will proceed with constructive negotiations leading to an agreement, bearing special responsibility for their potential impact on the international community.
In our common effort to realize a nuclear-weapon-free world, it is imperative to ensure the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). We call upon those States that have not yet ratified this Treaty, in particular the remaining nine Annex II States, to do so immediately. We also stress the importance of maintaining a moratorium on nuclear testing until the entry into force of the CTBT.
Furthermore, the negotiation of an FMCT is indispensable not only for nuclear non-proliferation, but also for nuclear disarmament, My delegation believes that time is ripe for the commencement of negotiations on an FMCT in the CD and calls upon all CD members to show more flexibility and political will so that negotiations can begin at the earliest possible date. Any meaningful progress in the pace of negotiations for the conclusion of the FMCT will serve as a locomotive for revitalizing the entire disarmament regime.
Mr. Chairman,
We hope that the 2010 Review Conference will represent a milestone for nuclear disarmament and revitalize the NPT as a cornerstone of international peace and security. To achieve this goal, it is necessary for all of us to reflect upon the evolution of the international situation over the past 10 years and to find a realistic and practical path toward a world free of nuclear weapons. This is exactly what needs to be done at this third NPT PrepCom meeting.
Thank you.