STATEMENT
BY
AMBASSADOR XOLISA MABHONGO,
RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVE/GOVERNOR
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE IAEA

FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS

CLUSTER I: NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT

3 MAY 2012
VIENNA

Check against delivery

Chairperson,
South Africa wishes to associate itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the New Agenda Coalition.
As stated during the General Debate, my delegation recognizes the significance of the
outcome of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, which not only reconfirmed the
continued validity of the outcomes of 1995 and 2000, but also agreed on an extensive
Action Plan aimed at accelerating the implementation of all Treaty provisions under all
three Treaty pillars.
We also stated that the agreement reached in 2010 was not a recognition that States
Parties were satisfied with the progress made in the implementation of past
agreements, but that it illustrated our collective commitment to the objectives of the
Treaty and the urgency that is required towards fulfilling these solemn undertakings. Of
particular importance was the reaffirmation of the unequivocal commitment by the
nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and
agreement to apply the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability in
fulfillment of Treaty obligations.
It is in this spirit that we will approach the work that needs to be undertaken in
preparation for the 2015 Review Conference.
Chairperson,
Despite some positive announcements, not much concrete progress has been
achieved in the area of nuclear disarmament.
We, nevertheless, welcome the steps taken towards the implementation of the New
START agreement between the Russian Federation and the United States that would
reduce operationally deployed strategic nuclear weapons. In this context, we recall
the commitment made in the 2010 Action Plan to continue work on achieving deeper
reductions in nuclear arsenals and welcome the positive statements recently made
by leaders in this regard. It is important that such cuts should address all nuclear
weapons, irrespective of their type or location. Reductions are indeed vital to
removing the excessive destructive capabilities developed during the Cold War, but
do not substitute for concrete, transparent, irreversible and verifiable nuclear
disarmament measures.
The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems
provide a clear indication that some of the NWS continue to harbour aspirations for
the indefinite retention of these instruments of destruction, contrary to their legal
obligations and political commitments. South Africa believes that we can only
effectively address the threat posed by nuclear weapons through inclusive, multilateral
processes. Universal adherence to, full implementation of and compliance with the
relevant multilateral instruments are therefore required.
South Africa appreciates the information that has been provided by some of the nuclearweapon States about their nuclear weapons arsenals and the implementation of their
nuclear disarmament objectives. Beyond the reporting obligations agreed to in 2010, we
would encourage all five nUclear-weapon States to further increase their efforts to
enhance transparency and to build confidence among States Parties.

Chairperson,
My delegation is deeply concerned about the continuing stalemate in the Conference
on Disarmament which undermines its credibility and raises questions about its
continued relevance. It is imperative that the work of this body is revitalised so that it
can again fulfil its mandate as the world's single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum.
In context, we remain committed to the soonest resumption of substantive work,
including through the establishment of a subsidiary body that would deal with nuclear
disarmament and one that would commence negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons that would serve both disarmament
and non-proliferation objectives, as agreed to in the 2010 Action Plan. My delegation
will remain actively engaged with a view to seeking solutions and compromises that
would make it possible for the Conference on Disarmament to finally commence
substantive work.
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as an important measure to
accomplish our common goals of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
We welcome the ratifications of Indonesia, the first Annex II to ratify since 2008, the
Central African Republic, Ghana, Guatemala and Guinea, Trinidad and Tobago and the
signature of Niue, since the adoption of the 2010 Action Plan. Though the eTBT has yet
to enter into force, my delegation looks forward to the realisation of the commitments
made to this effect by particularly Annex 2 States, among others, the United States and
China.
Chairperson,
It remains South Africa's firm conviction that nuclear weapons do not guarantee
security, but rather detract from it. As long as these weapons exist, humanity will
continue to face the threat of catastrophe. The continued retention of nuclear
weapons, including by the States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities
outside the NPT, continue to be of concern to my delegation. For as long as these
weapons exist there may be other that will seek to acquire them.
Nuclear weapons also consume billions, which could be better directed to assisting
countries to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, thereby ending poverty,
inequality and underdevelopment. Let us recall the wise words of the late President
of the African National Congress, Mr Oliver Reginald Tambo, who over twenty-five
years ago spoke of the link between disarmament and development. In this regard,
he argued that ' ... the achievement of peace ... requires that the world community
should abolish underdevelopment and guarantee the social progress of all
peoples ... As long as the super-rich pour enormous resources into the development
of weapons of mass destruction, it will be impossible banish hunger".
The continued threat of nuclear weapons and the enormous humanitarian
consequences of the possession and use of nuclear weapons require all of us, States
and members of civil society, to respond appropriately. It is in context, that my
delegation associated itself with the statement delivered yesterday by Switzerland on
behalf of a group of concerned states from various regions around the world. We need
to ensure that the horror of 1945 is never repeated and that humanity is finally freed from
the curse of these weapons of mass annihilation. This cannot be achieved through a
selective focus on the non-proliferation provisions of the Treaty alone. After 42 years
since the entry-into-force of the NPT, the world can no longer be complacent about the
continued threat posed by nuclear weapons and the lack of implementation of the

disarmament obligations flowing from Article VI of the Treaty towards the total elimination
of all nuclear weapons.
The Treaty and the outcomes of its Review Conferences need to be respected if we are
to ensure the continued vitality of this instrument. Measurable progress on nuclear
disarmament must therefore be a major determinant in achieving and in sustaining
intemational security. South Africa will therefore continue to support all efforts aimed
at the achievement of a world free from all weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons.
I thank you, Chairperson.

