STATEMENT
BY THE
DR JOHNNY PITSWANE, ALTERNATE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER 1 ISSUES

... MAY 2017
VIENNA

Check against delivery

Chairperson,
South Africa associates itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement and the New Agenda Coalition. To this, I add a few additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Chairperson,

My delegation would like to start by reiterating South Africa's commitment to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its three equally
important pillars, namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We believe that nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes and therefore progress in both
elements is essential to realise the object and purpose of the NPT. In this regard,
we would like to express our concern on the lack of significant progress on nuclear
disarmament.
Chairperson,
In South Africa's view, the existence of nuclear weapons poses a serious threat to
humanity. The only way to eliminate the threat posed by nuclear weapons is to
completely eliminate all nuclear weapons as envisaged under the NPT's grand
bargain. Article VI makes it clear that nuclear disarmament is an obligation of all
States Parties. It is therefore an obligatory and shared responsibility of all States to
prevent any use of nuclear weapons, to curb their proliferation and to achieve
nuclear disarmament. South Africa believes that the only guarantee against the use
or threat of use posed by nuclear weapons is their total elimination and legally
binding assurances that they will never be produced again.

Chairperson,
South Africa has consistently and strongly condemned the nuclear tests carried out
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) and its provocative actions
1

which only add to the escalation of tensions in the Korean Peninsula. We continue to
strongly call upon the DPRK to cease its unacceptable actions by verifiably
dismantling any nuclear weapons, return to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) without delay, comply with its legally binding comprehensive safeguards
obligations under the IAEA. Moreover, we urge the DPRK to return to the Six Party
Talks and to refrain from any actions that could further complicate the volatile
political and security situation in the Korean Peninsula.

Chairperson,

South Africa also believes that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
constitutes an important disarmament and non-proliferation measure. South Africa
supports the establishment of new zones, including in the Middle East, but also other
regions such as Europe. We urge States that are still to ratify nuclear-weapon-free
zones Treaties to do so without further delay.

We also urge all nuclear-weapon

States that have signed or ratified any of the relevant protocols of the nuclearweapon-free zones treaties and that did so with reservations or unilateral
interpretations affecting the status of the denuclearized zone, to modify or withdraw
any reservations or unilateral interpretations not consistent with the object and
purpose of such treaties.

Chairperson,

Beyond the Article VI obligations, there is no more compelling reason for the pursuit
of nuclear disarmament than the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any
use of nuclear weapons. Concerns about the catastrophic humanitarian impact of
nuclear weapons have been with us since the first use of these weapons. These
concerns were the motivating factor for the establishment of the NPT and they
remain a motivating factor in insisting that its provisions are fully implemented.

For South Africa, it is important that we recall the outcomes of the Oslo, Nayarit and
Vienna International Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons.
2

Chairperson,

It is inconceivable that the use of Nuclear Weapons could ever, under any
circumstances, be consistent with international law, particularly international
humanitarian law.

Chairperson,

We welcome the steps taken under the New START agreement between the
Russian Federation and the United States to reduce operationally deployed strategic
nuclear weapons. In this context, we recall the commitment made in the 2010 Action
Plan to continue work on achieving deeper reductions. It is important that such cuts
should address all nuclear weapons, irrespective of their type or location. While
these reductions are undoubtedly vital to removing the excessive destructive
capabilities developed during the Cold War, they do not substitute for concrete,
transparent, irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament measures.

The development of new categories of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems
provide a clear indication that some of the NWS continue to harbour aspirations for
the indefinite retention of these instruments of destruction, contrary to their legal
obligations and commitments. It is regrettable that vast public resources are diverted
towards the modernization of nuclear weapons. Much-needed resources could be
redirected towards development assistance, including the achievement of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

Chairperson,

My delegation would like to reiterate its deep concern about the continuing stalemate
in the Conference on Disarmament that undermines its credibility and raises
questions about its continued relevance. We remain committed to the soonest
resumption of substantive work, including through the establishment of subsidiary
bodies that would deal with nuclear disarmament and commence negotiations on a

3

•
fissile material treaty that would serve both disarmament and non-proliferation
objectives, as agreed to in the 2010 Action Plan.

Chairperson,

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is an important element of the set
of mutually-reinforcing instruments aimed at accomplishing our common goals of
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and we look forward to its early entry
into force.

Chairperson,
In conclusion,

South Africa welcomes the start of the UN process to negotiate a legally-binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards their total elimination. We
view this prohibition instrument as a positive step towards the strengthening of the
nuclear disarmament pillar of the NPT. We are encouraged with progress achieved
during the first UN Conference held in New York in March 2017, which we believe
will provide the necessary impetus to give effect to the expectations of the
international community towards the achievement of a world without nuclear
weapons. In this regard, South Africa continues to encourage all Member States to
participate in this important process.

I thank you, Chairperson.

4

•

