2017-05-03

Check against delivery!

NPT Prep Com 2017 - Cluster 1- Statement by Sweden
Mr Chainnan,
Sweden aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union
under this cluster, and would like to add the following national perspectives.
In these days of intense disarmament debate, it is worth recalling that a world free
of nuclear weapons is an overarching goal to which we are all committed. Current
security challenges, from a Swedish perspective, make this task more urgent - not
less. Nuclear weapons can never be the basis for sustainable security. The
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of these weapons are well
documented and irrefutable.
When my Minister spoke at the Conference on Disarmament in March this year,
she noted that the NPT, while in many respects successful- indeed indispensable as the cornerstone of global disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, had not
lived up to its full potential. The main reason for this, she made clear, is an
implementation deficit in the disarmament dimension of the treaty. A serious effort
by states parties to deliver on the commitments made during previous review
cycles, in particular the 13 practical steps from the 2000 Review Conference and
the 2010 NPT Action Plan, would go a long way towards rectifying this.
Mr Chairman,
Bilateral agreements on significant reductions by nuclear weapon states, particularly
those with the largest arsenals, have previously contributed to the maintenance of
international peace and security. But additional steps are now needed to bring
down the global stockpile from current levels. The New START Treaty is of crucial
importance. As it expires in 2021, we strongly encourage the United States and
Russia to initiate a dialogue on further deep reductions. As part of such efforts, a
reduction of tactical nuclear weapons, a category entirely outside existing
agreements, would be of particular importance. Special emphasis should also be
given to nuclear-armed cruise missiles in light of the distinctly de-stabilizing
features of these weapons.
Against the backdrop of a deteriorating security climate, the risk that nuclear
weapons will be used - by accident, miscalculation or design - is increasing. Risk-

reducing measures should therefore be prominent on our agenda. Let me invite you
to join Sweden and Switzerland at our side-event focused on risk reduction,
arranged in cooperation with Global Zero, which will be held on Friday 5 May.
Mr Chairman,
Other measures that can and ought to be pursued include negative security
assurances. Non-nuclear weapon states have a legitimate interest in receiving
unequivocal and legally binding negative security assurances from nuclear weapon
possessing states, building on their unilateral statements in the context of UN
Security Council resolution 984 from 1995.
Another key issue is the entry into force of the CTBT. Sweden has a history of
deep political and technical support to the CTBT. The norm against testing already
established by this treaty is an achievement in itself. However, as the DPRK
nuclear tests demonstrate, it cannot be taken for granted. Nor can it ever be fully
consolidated without a formal entry-into-force. We reiterate our call on all States
which have not yet done so, in particular those listed in Annex 2, to sign and ratify
the treaty.
An encouraging step was the decision at last year's First Committee to set up a high
level expert preparatory group on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, or FMCT. This
is a question which should have been dealt with long ago by the CD - a forum
whose prolonged paralysis is a source of great concern. Let us aim to follow up the
work of the expert group - in which Sweden will participate - by concrete action,
including the launch of actual negotiations.
Mr Chairman,
Sweden is actively participating in the on-going UN-mandated negotiations on a
legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons. As we have stated
previously, we believe that a future ban and the NPT should be able to co-exist;
ensuring this is the case is a key Swedish position in the on-going negotiations. The
outcome we seek is a reinforced norm against use or possession of nuclear
weapons. If this can be achieved remains to be seen. But the Swedish perspective is
that we have an obligation to explore any avenue with potential to accomplish
effective legal disarmament measures, thus contributing to the implementation of
Article VI of the NPT.
Thank you!

