Mr President,
The context in which this Review Conference opens is different from that of 2005 as regards nuclear disarmament. Since 2005, a certain amount of progress has been made by nuclear- weapon States. The most recent example is the data provided by the United States during the general debate on the precise figures for their nuclear arsenal and their pledge to continue to show such transparency in the future.
However, as we Stated in the general debate, results in terms of concrete disarmament remain modest.
Mr President,
We believe that this conference provides an unique opportunity to establish the current trend towards nuclear disarmament on a more solid foundation. In this context, we would expect that an outcome document of this conference to be balanced and to include the following three points:
to re-affirm the acquis of previous conferences and to recognize the results achieved in this direction;
to demand that more results should be achieved;
to spell out how such results are to be achieved.
As for the question of "how", Switzerland expects this conference to adopt an action plan to move forward nuclear disarmament in a concrete, progressive and pragmatic manner. This could be possible by taking up, updating and even moving beyond the 'Thirteen Practical Steps" of 2000, notably by specifying the time frame in which the objectives can be achieved. Such an action plan should contain the following three elements:
1. Firstly: a dimension on quantitative disarmament. This primarily concerns the nuclear arsenals of the two most heavily armed nuclear-weapon States since it is here that the matter is most urgent. Switzerland consequently encourages the U.S. and Russia to launch a new round of negotiations as soon as possible in order to further reduce their existing arsenals. Such negotiations should deal both with strategic and non-strategic weapons, those deployed as well as those not deployed. Concerning non-strategic weapons - which generate particular vulnerabilities in terms of nuclear security - Switzerland considers that they no longer have a place in today's Europe. In this context, Switzerland welcomes the recent debate initiated on this issue by several European States.
Still in the area of quantitative nuclear disarmament, Switzerland also calls on the other nuclear-weapon States to fully integrate this reduction process. Moreover, it seems essential that they refrain from any further increases to their arsenals under any circumstances since this would run counter to the principle of irreversibility adopted at the 2000 Review Conference.
Secondly: such an action plan must include the dimension of qualitative disarmament. At the general debate we noted the degree to which this aspect had been raised by many States in particular regarding nuclear doctrines:
- It is important that each nuclear-weapon State forgo programmes related to the qualitative development of its nuclear arsenals. Quantitative reductions alone will not be enough if at the same time a parallel qualitative dimension of nuclear-weapon development continues.
It also concerns the reduction of the operational readiness of nuclear weapons, i.e. the "de-alerting". Switzerland, together with other countries, has been deeply committed to this issue through the promotion of a resolution in the UN General Assembly. We intend to continue our efforts within the framework of this Conference. To this end, New Zealand has introduced Working Paper N° 10 on behalf of the "de-alerting" group for consideration in this "Main Committee". This paper contains concrete recommendations for our work.
It also relates to the reduction of the role of nuclear weapons in military doctrines by working towards the universal acceptance of the "no-first use policy".
Thirdly: such an action plan must include all nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear weapon States alike. This dimension would include the beginning of negotiations within the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva on a treaty to ban the production of fissile material for military purposes, on a legally binding instrument concerning negative security assurances, and on the earliest possible ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty by States listed in Annex II that have not yet taken that step.
Mr President,
It is clear that if we achieve the adoption of such an action plan, we will be able to speak of
this Conference as a success.
However, Switzerland is of the opinion that we should aim to develop a vision that goes beyond this Conference and the "Thirteen Practical Steps". As a nuclear war would threaten the very survival of all humankind, a debate should be launched concerning the legitimacy of the use of such weapons. Switzerland has considered important to launch such a debate, and has asked the Monterrey Institute to provide a study on the issue of de-legitimizing nuclear weapons. My delegation invites the States Parties to the NPT to the presentation of this study on 10 May in the margins of this Conference.
Ultimately, the question of banning nuclear weapons by a new convention - as proposed by the UN Secretary General - must be addressed. Switzerland expects the final document of this conference to re-affirm the objective of achieving a world without nuclear weapons, and to encourage the discussion on a convention to ban nuclear weapons.
Mr President,
The possession of nuclear weapons by a small number of States constitutes a security risk for all. Switzerland is convinced that it is not an Utopian dream to draw a new system of international relations in which fewer nuclear weapons - or none at all - would create greater security.
Thank you for your attention.Statement by the United States Ambassador Laura Kennedy Main Committee I
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to congratulate you and pledge our support as you undertake this important post.
This Review Conference provides an opportunity for all of us to rededicate ourselves to the central purpose of this treaty: to prevent the devastating effects of nuclear war. This is the underlying purpose of our efforts here, and of all of our collective efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and ultimately to eliminate them. It is also is why the U.S. Nuclear Posture Review stressed the importance - not just for the United States but for all nations - of extending forever the 65-year record of non-use of nuclear weapons.
But preventing nuclear war is not something that we or any other nation can accomplish alone. Every nation - indeed every person on this planet - benefits from our efforts to confront global nuclear dangers, and every nation can contribute to their success. Indeed, we all have a responsibility to act with unified purpose to ensure that these efforts succeed. As a part of that collective effort, my government and those of the other nuclear weapon states collaborated on a wide- ranging and balanced statement designed to identify areas of common concerns and to identify ways in which we can make progress together. We have read with interest the many papers and proposals that have been forward.
In his April 2009 speech in Prague, President Obama made clear the U.S. commitment to his intent to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national security strategy and to take concrete steps toward a world without nuclear weapons. He identified three areas where the international community needs to work together to reduce nuclear dangers: disarmament, nonproliferation, and nuclear security.
On disarmament, he reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons. He acknowledged that achieving this goal would not be easy and might not take place in his lifetime. It will require patience and persistence to overcome the obstacles to this vision.
President Obama identified specific steps the United States will pursue to achieve this goal. These include the New START Treaty he and Russian President Medvedev signed in Prague last month. My distinguished colleague, Ambassador
Antonov, presented on our joint behalf a statement on New START. This treaty demonstrates the continuing commitment of the world's two largest nuclear powers to reduce their nuclear arsenals and advance the objectives of Article VI. I am delighted that the two lead negotiators, Assistant Secretary Gottemoeller and Amb. Antonov, will offer a briefing to the Conference on May 11.
We will also seek to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and to encourage others to do the same, in order to bring that treaty into force. My President just welcomed Indonesia's decision to move forward on ratification of the CTBT to whom we all say "terimah kasih".
We have redoubled our efforts to negotiate a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty, which would put an end to the production of the essential ingredients in nuclear weapons. I will have more to say on these disarmament efforts in my statement to the Subsidiary Body of this Committee.
On nonproliferation, President Obama committed the United States to strengthen the NPT as the basis for international cooperation to prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. "The basic bargain is sound," he said. I would like to examine that bargain more closely and examine what makes it so important to all of us.
It is often said that the key bargain for non-nuclear-weapon states is that, in exchange for their commitment not to acquire nuclear weapons, they gain a commitment from the nuclear-weapon states to disarm. This is an important part of the NPT bargain, but it is a bargain that works both ways. The nonproliferation undertakings by non-nuclear-weapon states help create a stable and secure international environment that makes it possible to work confidently toward the goal of nuclear disarmament.
That is why we need to work together to halt nuclear proliferation and to strengthen international safeguards in order to provide stronger assurances that states are meeting their non-proliferation obligations and stronger tools to respond if they do not. Our efforts cannot succeed if violators are allowed to act with impunity. Therefore, we will need to establish effective, internationally supported mechanisms for discouraging and reversing noncompliance.
In addition to working together to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime and reverse the spread of nuclear weapons, we also must work together to resolve regional disputes that may motivate rival states to acquire and maintain
nuclear weapons. This will help reduce mistrust and build momentum for the further-reduction and eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
To put it simply, nonproliferation is one of the essential conditions for the achievement of nuclear disarmament. This is one reason why the disarmament undertakings in Article VI apply to all Parties to the Treaty.
Another important part of the NPT bargain, just as important and much more immediate, is the bargain among the non-nuclear-weapon states, who commit to one another not to acquire nuclear weapons. This is arguably the greatest and most immediate benefit to the security of most of the states party to the NPT.
To extend these security benefits as broadly as possible, we remain committed to the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty. While we pursue that goal, we call on those states that have yet to sign the NPT to adopt the standards and practices embodied in the NPT and the broader nuclear non-proliferation regime.
We also call on North Korea - the one state that has announced its withdrawal from the Treaty - to return to compliance with the NPT and IAEA safeguards, as called for in the September 2005 Joint Statement from the Six-Party Talks and in successive resolutions of the UN Security Council.
There are other connections between the non-proliferation and disarmament goals of the Treaty, particularly in the area of verification. The International Atomic Energy Agency has decades of experience in applying safeguards to verify that peaceful nuclear activities are not diverted to weapons use. This experience can be brought to bear in the nuclear disarmament process in two critical ways.
First, nuclear-weapon states may choose to place under IAEA verification material they identify as no longer needed for weapons purposes, and can invite the IAEA to verify that it is converted into forms no longer suitable for nuclear weapons use, as the United States has done. Since the end of the Cold War, the United States has down-blended nearly 118 tons of highly enriched uranium removed from defense programs - enough for roughly 3,000 weapons - to produce low-enriched uranium reactor fuel. Much of that down-blending took place under IAEA safeguards or in facilities available for IAEA inspection. Together with Russia, we are working to dispose of at least 68 tons of plutonium from weapons programs - enough for over 17,000 weapons - and we foresee a critical verification role for the IAEA in that disposition.
Second, the IAEA could - and in our view should - be given the responsibility to verify that states are not producing new fissile material for use in nuclear weapons. A verifiable Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty could place under IAEA monitoring all of the most sensitive fuel cycle facilities - enrichment and reprocessing facilities - that are capable of producing fissile material.
These important steps by the IAEA could make an important contribution in promoting international confidence that nuclear material and facilities formerly dedicated to nuclear weapons programs are now devoted entirely to peaceful purposes.
Alongside nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, the third element of President Obama's Prague agenda is nuclear security. To address the nuclear dangers that we face, we need to prevent the use of nuclear weapons, not just by states but by violent non-state actors. The potential availability of weapons-usable materials, and the widespread knowledge of how to manufacture a simple nuclear explosive make this a real and pressing threat.
This is why President Obama established the goal of securing the most sensitive nuclear materials in the world within four years. The Nuclear Security Summit last month brought together leaders from forty-seven countries and three international organizations to make concrete commitments to advance this goal.
Alongside nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, nuclear security is an essential part of our efforts to create the conditions for a world without nuclear weapons, a goal to which we must all rededicate ourselves here. This must be our common vision, and achieving it will require concerted efforts by all countries, nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states alike.
The three pillars of the NPT provide a solid architecture for our broader efforts to confront nuclear dangers worldwide. But this structure cannot endure if we pick and choose which parts of it we want to support, and withhold support from others. Our choice is clear: we must work together to reinforce all three pillars of the Treaty to ensure that its benefits endure for future generations.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



