Mr. Chairman,
In 2010, all Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) expressed their
deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons. Our
delegation associates itself fully with the joint statement delivered yesterday by South Africa on behalf
of 77 States. Switzerland remains convinced that nuclear weapons do not generate security but are a
threat to international as well as human security.
Two-thirds of the UN Membership as well as representatives of important international and nongovernmental organizations met last month in Oslo to give further consideration to this deep concern
expressed in 2010. The main conclusion of this conference is clear: no matter how well governments
or humanitarian actors prepare, the immediate as well as the wider effects of the use of nuclear
weapons cannot be mitigated and the consequences would be unacceptable. Efforts must therefore
be redoubled to prevent any nuclear detonation - be it caused by accident, miscalculation or willful
intent. We welcome this fact-based, fresh and long overdue humanitarian approach. We are also
looking forward to deepening discussions on this issue, including at the follow-up meeting that Mexico
will host.
Mr. Chairman,
The prevention of any use of nuclear weapons, and consequently of a nuclear catastrophe, is a
shared responsibility. Article VI of the NPT indeed makes it clear that each of the States Party to the
Treaty is called upon to advance nuclear disarmament.
One challenge we are facing is how to break of the deadlock of the multilateral disarmament
machinery. In partnership with other States, Switzerland has made concrete proposals. It must remain
a priority for all States Parties to make the disarmament machinery functional again - not least
because the implementation of key NPT decisions is directly linked to the Conference on
Disarmament (CD).
The establishment of the Open Ended Working Group (OEWG) by resolution AlRES/67/56 is a
reaction to the continuing deadlock in the CD. This working group offers the possibility to work
together collectively and inclusively to advance nuclear disarmament.
Just like the Oslo Conference, this working group is in full conformity with the spirit and letter of the
NPT. In this regard, our delegation would reject to qualify as "distraction" any efforts undertaken in
good faith to achieve the common goals enshrined in this treaty.
Neither do we consider "boycotts" of such discussion fora as a way of improving transparence and
confidence.
Mr. Chairman,
We acknowledge that significant disarmament steps have been undertaken by Nuclear Weapon
States (NWS). While we welcome these efforts that are bringing us closer to a world free of nuclear
weapons, we are far from being satisfied. In view of the catastrophic impact of any use of nuclear
weapons, Switzerland is seriously concerned
•

that almost 2'000 weapons are deployed to be launched within minutes,

•

that nuclear arsenals contain several thousand additional warheads,

•

that sufficient fissile material is retained to manufacture countless others,

4

•

finally, and, above all, that all NWS are not only holding on to the logic of nuclear deterrence
but are also modernizing their nuclear weapons systems.

The disappointing state of play was underlined by three independent reports by civil society and
academic experts monitoring recent nuclear disarmament steps. Progress remains inexistent in
numerous field s and many of the objectives we have set in the 2010 action plan are far from being
met. And where existent, progress is not being made on a scale and at a speed to match the
challenge. Not surprisingly, yellow and red flags are blinking in all three reports.
Much can still be done in the coming months to accelerate the step-by-step-implementation of the
nuclear disarmament obligations. We welcome the efforts of the NWS to work together. But 2014 is
rapidly approaching - and with it, the moment when NWS are to report on the results of this
cooperation as well as on the steps they have taken to implement the obligations deriving from this
Treaty.
We are therefore hopeful that recent signals by some nuclear-weapon States will translate into
tangible action that will give new momentum to the step-by-step-approach. More concrete results - be
they of unilateral, bilateral or multilateral nature - could not only help prevent future nuclear disasters
but would also send a strong Signal to all States in the world that these instruments of mass
destruction - the only WMD currently not banned - are not desirable but relicts of the past. One very
concrete step that Russia and the US can take before the next Review Conference is to decrease the
operational readiness of nuclear weapons. Such high alerl levels are not necessary, contradict
ongoing efforts to reduce the role and numbers of nuclear weapons and are dangerous - as we know
from various "near misses" in the past, when humanity came close to accidental nuclear war. Our
delegation associates itself fully with the joint De-Alerling statement made yesterday by Nigeria on this
issue.
Mr. Chairman,
I would like to take this opportunity to refer your attention to a Working Paper submitted by Switzerland
for this Session of the Preparatory Committee. This working paper underlines that the NPT States
parties have resolved to apply a number of key principles in relation to nuclear disarmament efforts.
The principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency are indeed key elements in ensuring the
sustainabilityof such efforts. However, very limited practical consideration has so far been given to the
implementation of the principle of irreversibility and the measures adopted to date give only limited
effect to its effective, appropriate and faithful application. This situation raises concerns as efforts to
achieve a world without nuclear weapons would be negatively impacted by any reversal of the nuclear
disarmament process. Consequently, the Working Paper submitted by Switzerland is putting forward a
number of actions to be taken at the 2015 Review Conference to ensure that this principle of
irreversibility is given greater effect.
Mr. Chairman,
Let me conclude by referring (once again) to Article VI which asks that "[e]ach of the Parties to the
Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of
the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament ( ... )". 43 years after the entry into
force of the Treaty and more than two decades after the end of the Cold War, we are far away from
realising this key NPT requirement. It is necessary to develop more concrete measures and
instruments in order to prevent and ban the use of nuclear weapons and ultimately eliminate them , as
all other weapons of mass destruction. Switzerland will continue to contribute to efforts towards
progressive delegitimization of nuclear weapons in order to pave the way for our final and common
objective of a world without nuclear weapons.
I thank you for your attention.

5

