Mr. Chairman,
The deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons was acknowledged in 2010 by all States parties to the Nuclear Non-proliferation
Treaty (NPT).
Recent fact-based discussions have underscored the devastating immediate and long-term
humanitarian impact of a nuclear weapon detonation. But beyond this, the humanitarian
narrative has also highlighted the imperative to safeguard the NPT’s integrity and credibility,
and to fully implement this key instrument for international security in order to avoid the
devastation that would be visited upon all mankind by a nuclear war.
In this context, the joint statement on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons by
New Zealand in the First Committee of the General Assembly bears particular importance.
Supported by not fewer than 125 States, this statement recognized that it is in the interest of
the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons are never used again, under any
circumstances, and that the only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons will never be used
again is through their total elimination. The broad support for this powerful message has to
drive our efforts.
Mr. Chairman,
While we can only hope that the practice of non-use of nuclear weapons since 1945 will last
indefinitely, we must not close our eyes to the broader risks associated with nuclear
weapons and current doctrines.
One such risk stems from the estimated 1’940 warheads (globally) that are ready to be
launched within minutes. Such high alert levels are rooted in Cold War thinking and they
increase the risk of nuclear launches due to accidents, unauthorized actions or
misperceptions. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the recent proposals
made by the De-Alerting group to take this issue forward.
The number of disturbing close calls in which nuclear weapons were nearly used due to
miscalculation or error also demonstrates that the current situation bears higher risks than
commonly understood.

6

Furthermore, nuclear command networks have become exposed to cyber-attacks.
Everything indicates that this is a new serious challenge.
Finally, the military value, international status and political prestige that some actors continue
to attribute to these weapons increase the risk of proliferation and that they will be used
again.
Mr. Chair,
The 2015 NPT Review Conference will take stock of efforts towards the implementation of
article VI. This will be a moment of truth for the disarmament-related actions of the 2010
Action Plan.
We welcome the reports made available by the Nuclear Weapon States and will analyse
them carefully. These reports are a positive first step. We appreciate for instance that they
are structured around standardized headers which cover actions 5, 20 and 21. Our initial
impression is, however, that there is significant room for improvement:
I would first of all mention the need for greater coherence: The information contained
differs significantly between reports. For instance, some disclose numbers about arsenals or
the size of fissile material stockpiles, while some do not. Some provide information relevant
to the period since 2010, others contain mainly information of an historic nature. As we
approach the Review Conference, the goal should therefore be to harmonize and consolidate
reporting. In particular, it would be particularly important that to establish a base-line
regarding arsenal size and stockpile of fissile material, from which we can measure future
progress in accordance with the principle of irreversibility.
Second, we cannot but conclude that there was no significant progress regarding
implementation of action 5 (which is the key decision of 2010 to accelerate concrete
progress on the steps leading to nuclear disarmament, contained in the Final Document of
the 2000 Review Conference). Of even greater concern is that, some of the reports are silent
on critical aspects, for instance with regard to qualitative and quantitative improvements of
arsenals that may outweigh some of the historic progress or run contrary to action 1 or 2. A
year before the Review Conference, it is high time to make real progress, in particular
regarding action 5.
There is an obvious lack of progress also with regard to many of the other actions that all
States Parties are to implement jointly. For instance, negotiating a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons (FMCT), ratifying the Comprehensive

7

Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), dealing with nuclear disarmament in the Conference on
Disarmament (CD), making progress on Negative Security Assurances (NSAs), or reporting.
Lack of reporting leads to a lack of transparency which can undermine the NPT.
Mr. Chair,
The Action Plan, together with the previous disarmament obligations contained in the final
documents of the Review Conferences of 1995 and 2000, has to remain our roadmap. The
Action Plan is not an end in itself; its value lies in its implementation. Leaving this NPT
commitment unfulfilled would undermine the treaty. Just like the Action Plan was key for the
positive outcome of the 2010 Review Conference, significant progress is crucial for a positive
outcome in 2015 and for the credibility of the NPT.
Looking forward, there is still some time to make significant progress until the 2015 Review
Conference, and we expect States Parties to spare no effort to meet this challenge.
Time has also come to initiate a joint reflection on the measures that will be necessary to
take forward nuclear disarmament at the Review Conference.
We have a significant number of unfulfilled commitments. We also seem to have different
understandings concerning the timeframes and the way in which different actions should be
implemented. In this context, we would expect the Review Conference to chart a clear path
forward. The Conference should:


generate more direction and identify very concrete deliverables;



indicate how such actions will be implemented progressively;



set measurable benchmarks for yet unfulfilled commitments with a view to implementing
them during the next cycle.

Nuclear disarmament in the NPT context is constructed on a building block approach, or the
realization of multiple, parallel and non-sequential steps. The Review Conference should
therefore also give direction on additional measures and instruments that might be necessary
in order to implement article VI fully and to achieve a world without nuclear weapons. This is
fully consistent with the 2010 outcome which affirmed that all States need to make special
efforts to establish the necessary framework to achieve and maintain a world without nuclear
weapons.

8

In this context, we welcome the holding of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on Nuclear Disarmament last September. It underlined that a collective and systematic effort
will be required to address the risks posed by nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chair,
We have to overcome divisions within the NPT. We have to accelerate efforts and realise
greater substantial progress. And we have to pursue this in a collective spirit, as it is our joint
responsibility to ensure that future generations will never again be confronted with the
destructive power of these inhumane weapons.
I thank you for your attention.

9

