Please check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF THAILAND
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
351 EAST 52ND STREET· NEW YORK, NY 10022
TEL (212) 754-2230 • FAX (212) 688-3029

Statement
by
the Delegation of Thailand
at the 2015 Review Conference
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Main Committee I
New York, 4 May 2015

Building Bridges for Partnership
THAILAND
ASEAN Candidate for the UN Security Council 2017 – 2018

1

Mr. Chairman,
I join other speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the Chairmanship of
this important Main Committee. My delegation has no doubt that with your
experience, leadership and guidance – and hopefully with flexibility of every
delegation – the Committee will arrive at a successful conclusion. You can count on
my delegation’s full support.
Thailand associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran last Friday.
Mr. Chairman,
Thailand shares the desire that must be repeated here, for a world free of nuclear
weapons. It is in the interest of both nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon
sates to work together towards the ultimate goal of the complete and total elimination
of such weapons. To us, “a world free of nuclear weapons” means “a world free of
nuclear weapons”. Unfortunately, to some, this inspiring phrase that we remind
ourselves of time and again still means the indefinite possession of these weapons.
As States Parties to the NPT, we all have a legal responsibility to fulfill our obligations
under Article VI on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control. In reviewing the operation of the Treaty, we offer the following
general thoughts with respect to nuclear disarmament;
1. We must keep working to bring all remaining countries into the Treaty. It is the
universality of the Treaty that would help guarantee the full realization of the
spirit and objective of the Treaty.
2. We must seriously consider necessary steps for the full implementation of
Article VI. At the same time, nuclear-weapon states must reaffirm their
commitment to take practical steps towards the implementation of unequivocal
nuclear disarmament.

2

3. We view that the most dynamic implementation of the 2010 Review Conference
Final Document has been the emphasis on the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons. Committed States Parties and civil
society should be commended for their persistence and productive contribution
for this very cause.
With the outcome of the three Humanitarian Conferences in Oslo, Nayarit and
Vienna, coupled with views and information contained in various working
papers submitted to the Conference by groups and countries, we here at the
Conference have no excuse for not having enough evidence-based information
to generate the discussion to make progress now.
For our part, Thailand together with the International Law and Policy Institute of
Norway, co-hosted a Regional Roundtable on the Humanitarian Impact of
Nuclear Weapons and the Prospects for a Ban Treaty in Bangkok in March this
year. The results of the roundtable only confirm the necessity and urgency for
discussions aiming at beginning an appropriate diplomatic process to address the
legal gaps.
We therefore call for further focused discussion on the issue and that the
elements of the outcomes from Humanitarian Conferences and proposals
stemming from similar initiatives be considered seriously by this Conference.
Addressing those calls for action is not only highly recommended but it is a
logical imperative for this Review Conference which can only serve to
strengthen the work of the NPT and the implementation of the instrument itself.
4. We must commit to do more to promote public awareness on the issue in all of
our countries. Particular attention should be paid on the younger generation. In
few years’ time, we may not have the survivors of the atomic bombings alive to
tell their stories. We also cannot afford for the younger generation of today to
learn by experiencing the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons
themselves. We take seriously the responsibility to promote credible and
sustained public education in order to continue support for nuclear disarmament.
The 70th Anniversary of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings and the annual
commemoration of the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons can provide important occasions for promoting greater public and
youth awareness around the world.

3

For Thailand, last year, we held a public speaking contest among the Thai youth
on the subject of “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons” to commemorate the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons. We commit to
continue to do more this year.
Mr. Chairman,
It is time that nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states alike must have
the courage to be creative, flexible and to move forward in a constructive manner.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

**********************

