1.	Thailand associates itself with the statement on Cluster I as delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aiigned Movement. We believe that compliance with the provisions of the NPT relating to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear disarmament is a crucial step in promoting the sanctity of the Treaty.
2.	In this regard, my delegation wishes to share our views on the current issues of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation as follows :
Disarmament
3.	Thailand is an advocate of wide, complete and verifiable disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. Thailand has signed and ratified the international conventions on security, disarmament and non-proliferation.
4.	As stated in its preamble, the NPT's ultimate goal is to create a world free of nuclear weapons and all WMD. Thailand therefore urges all NWS to fully implement the Article VI of the Treaty in order to make a real progress in the field of nuclear disarmament. Fulfillment of previous commitments of NWS such as the 13 Practical steps to Disarmament, which was agreed by States Parties in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference, is crucial for the success of the NPT Review Cycle and the non-proliferation and disarmament regime itself.
5.	Thailand also believes that clear commitment and concrete steps to a total elimination of nuclear weapons must be undertaken by NWS and non-NPT members possessing nuclear weapons, in a transparent manner. Furthermore, we want to strongly recommend the creation of an impartial entity to follow up on the implementation of the outcomes of NPT Review Conferences and other related commitments. We also support the establishment of a subsidiary body on nuclear disarmament to deal with the issue of fulfillment of the obligations under Article VI of the Treaty. We firmly believe that the existence of such institutions will pave the way for the smooth and speedy realization of the ultimate goal of the NPT.
6 Thailand is encouraged by the renewed commitment made by the President of the United States in Prague on the 5th of April 2009 to build "a new framework for civil nuclear cooperation/' and the I I benchmarks of global nuclear disarmament proposed
by the Japanese government to create a world free of nuclear weapons. The new framework proposed by the President of the United States would allow all interested countries to enjoy the benefits of nuclear energy while limiting the associated risks of nuclear weapons proliferation.
7.	Against this backdrop, Thailand calls for the early conclusion of a new treaty on strategic arms reduction between the United States and the Russian Federation. We hope that the new Treaty will bring about a significant progress in the reduction of nuclear war heads and their means of delivery.
8.	Thailand also wishes to reiterate its support for the commencement of negotiations on a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control. We also call for the Conference on Disarmament to establish an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament as repeatedly called for by relevant UNGA Resolutions.
9.	My delegation believes that the Conference on Disarmament, as a sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, should regain its momentum to maintain its effectiveness and efficiency. Thailand therefore hopes that the CD will reach an agreement on its programme of work and continue the discussion on; first, Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT - on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator (CD/1299); second, on a prevention of an arms race in outer space (PAROS) and the draft treaty presented by China and Russia (CD/1847) on nuclear disarmament and; third, on a legally binding instrument on negative security assurances.
10.	Thailand welcomes the reports adopted last week during the first three-year cycle of the United Nations Disarmament Commission. My delegation underlines the positive and constructive atmosphere at the 2009 session, even though there were divergent views on "Recommendations for achieving the objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons" and "the elements ofa draft declaration of the 2010s as the disarmament decade" had not been agreed. Taking into account the degree of convergence of different positions and approaches and the flexibility shown bv delegations, there is hope that agreement could be achieved next year.
Non-Proliferation
11.	Thailand attaches great importance to the prevention of nuclear proliferation. Thailand has adhered to and fully implemented all major international agreements on non-proliferation of WMD, as well as the UNSC Resolution 1540 (2004). We also support international efforts to eliminate the proliferation of WMD and related material for the terrorist use. We are now finalizing our domestic legal requirements for ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the amended Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, to which Thailand intends to become State Party in the near future.
12.	However, Thailand wishes to emphazise that measures taken to promote the non-proliferaton of nuclear weapons should not be used as unfair obstacles for developing countries to import or export nuclear materials, equipment and technology for peaceful and civilian purposes. We believe that the adoption and implementation of measures, such as export control for the purpose of promoting non-proliferation should be undertaken in a transparent Justified and realistic manner.
13.	Thailand also believes that States Parties to the NPT should intensify their efforts to raise public awareness of the danger of WMD. Public opposition to the construction or existence of a nuclear arsenal would positively contribute to the creation of the nuclear-weapons-free world. Education is, in our view, the essential tool to raise public awareness on the danger of WMD. My delegation, therefore, supports the idea of promoting non-proliferation and disarmament through education.
14.	In this connection, Thailand would like to reiterate our strong commitment to work with the international community to achieve a common goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. All of us have a stake and a collective interest to ensure peace, security and stability of the world - the world where our children can live their lives without fear of weapons of mass destruction. Together, we can achieve that goal. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.