Statement by Turkey

at the 2015 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons
(Main Committee I)

6 May 2015, New York

Mr. Chairman,
I would like to begin by congratulating you on your assumption to the Chairmanship of the
Main Committee-I. Let me also thank you for your leadership during the last PrepCom. You
can count on our delegation's support.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey sees the NPT as the fundamental instrument for nuclear disarmament, hence remains
fully committed to its objectives and provisions, its further strengthening and universalization.
We are firmly convinced that the achievement of the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear
weapons depends first and foremost on the successful and universal implementation of the
NPT regime.
Throughout the review cycle, Turkey engaged with its NPDI partners to promote the
implementation of the consensus outcomes of the 2010 Action Plan. NPDI has provided
working papers that would be useful at the deliberations at the present Review Conference.
Based on this constructive and forward-looking approach, we have submitted our concrete
recommendations (NPT/CONF.2015/WP.16) with a view to contributing to the next review
cycle. We hope these recommendations will be reflected in the outcome document.
Beyond our active participation in the preparatory process of the 2015 RevCon, we closely
followed developments pertaining to the nuclear disarmament. Doubtlessly, the New START
was the most noteworthy and encouraging development in that regard. The announcement of
some additional arms control measures by certain Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) was also a
good sign. Turkey welcomed these bilateral and unilateral steps forward. In this regard, we
hope the United States and the Russian Federation will continue their efforts in order to
achieve further reductions in their nuclear arsenals.
Transparency stands out as a significant aspect of the overall nuclear disarmament efforts. In
that regard too, we are glad to see progress as the nuclear weapons states submitted their
reports to the NPT. The NPDI has also contributed to this process by formulating report
templates.
Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the level of frustration stemming from the shortcomings in the
effective implementation of the 2010 Action Plan in particular Article 6.
The failure of convening an international conference on the creation of a WMD-free zone in
the Middle East in accordance with the 1995 Middle East Resolution, which was part of the
NPT Grand Bargain, as well as the 2010 NPT RevCon Final Document has been another
grave disappointment.
Mr. Chairman,
The undesirable shortcomings show us that the realm of the nuclear disarmament is by no
means disconnected from the real world; to the contrary, it is inherently linked to and interacts
with existing tensions among actors, divergent threat perceptions and strategic calculation of
the interplay among scores of different dynamics.

As a matter of fact, Turkey pays due attention to various lines of thinking in nuclear
disarmament. These trends also involve growing awareness towards the necessity to end the
predominant role that nuclear forces play in security and defence policies and doctrines.
Decades after the Cold War, there is still much more that needs to be done in this regard.
Turkey believes that this growing awareness should be transformed into a general
understanding, which should encompass all relevant actors so that it would result in the
overall and systematic reduction of the dependence on nuclear weapons.
Turkey is concerned at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, as expressed in the Final Document. The catastrophic humanitarian impact of
nuclear weapons fundamentally underpins all our work for nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in pursuit of a world free of nuclear weapons.
It is worth mentioning that no single step can suffice in our global efforts for nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. Turkey is convinced that only a step-by-step process,
based on building blocks can ultimately lead our world to the objective of Global Zero.
Effective, irreversible and verifiable nuclear disarmament takes place in a strategic context
where undiminished security for all as the guiding principle should be upheld.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey underscores the need for further reductions by all states possessing nuclear weapons in
their nuclear arsenals as practical measures towards general and complete nuclear
disarmament in a transparent, irreversible and verifiable manner. In this regard, we welcome
the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification launched by the United
States.
Mutual trust is the key factor in creating a conducive climate for further practical steps
in nuclear disarmament. Turkey also welcomes that the nuclear weapon states have a working
coordination among themselves as has lastly been demonstrated in London. Yet, addressing
the issue of trust between nuclear weapon haves and have nots is a much wider
problem. Negative security assurances by the nuclear weapon states to the non-nuclear
weapon states are seen as a viable solution to this issue, within the three-pillars regime of the
NPT.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) will be a significant step
forward and constitute an important building block. As a state-party to the CTBT since 2000,
Turkey calls upon all States that have not yet signed and ratified the Treaty, to do so, in
particular, the Annex II countries. Pending the entry into force of the Treaty, maintaining the
moratorium on nuclear explosion test is of crucial importance. Turkey also wishes to
commend the remarkable technical work done by the CTBTO.
Also, the commencement of negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral, and verifiable
treaty to ban the production of fissile material (FMCT) for nuclear weapons and other nuclear
explosive devices would be another building block in nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation. Turkey considers that the report of the Special Coordinator (CD/1299) and the
mandate contained therein provide necessary guidance to kick-off the negotiation process. In
the same vein, Turkey notes the news about the successful completion of the GGE report and
believes that this will contribute to the deliberations in the Conference on Disarmament (CD).

Thank you.

