UNITED KINGDOM

CLUSTER I - DISARMAMENT
By

Ambassador Jo Adamson
UK Ambassador to the
Conference on Disarmament

Head of the United Kingdom Delegation
at the
2012 Preparatory Committee for the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

VIENNA, 3 May 2012

Please check against delivery
Check against delivery

1

UNITED KINGDOM
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR JO ADAMSON TO THE FIRST PREPARATORY
COMMITTEE FOR THE NINTH REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIOFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS: VIENNA, 30 APRIL –
11 MAY 2012
CLUSTER I – DISARMAMENT
Mr Chairman,
My delegation fully supports the statement just made by the distinguished representative of
the European External Action Service on behalf of the European Union. On the disarmament
pillar, I would like to set out what the UK has been doing to make progress, and what we
have been doing in concert with our P5 and other partners.
UK unilateral action
The UK remains absolutely committed to the long-term goal of a world without nuclear
weapons. We have a strong record of fulfilling our disarmament commitments and of meeting
our international legal obligations which flow from our membership of the NPT as a Nuclear
Weapons State.
While nuclear weapons exist, and while the future security environment remains so uncertain,
the UK government remains committed to retaining a credible and effective minimum
nuclear deterrent. At the 2010 Review Conference, we declared for the first time the
maximum number of nuclear warheads in the UK stockpile, and announced a re-examination
of the UK’s nuclear declaratory policy.
Our 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review concluded that the UK could meet the
minimum necessary requirements for credible deterrence with a smaller nuclear weapons
capability. We therefore set out a number of new disarmament measures, announcing that we
would by the mid 2020s:


reduce the number of warheads onboard each of our submarines from 48 to 40;



reduce the requirement for operationally available warheads to no more than 120;



reduce the number of operational missiles on the Vanguard class submarines to no
more than 8; and



reduce our overall nuclear weapons stockpile to no more than 180.

In June 2011 we announced that the programme for implementing these warhead reductions
had commenced early, and that at least one of our submarines now carries a maximum of 40
nuclear warheads. We expect the reduction in operationally available warheads to 120 to take
place by the time of the next Review Conference in 2015.

Check against delivery

2

As a result of our declaratory policy review, we also announced in the SDSR a new, stronger
security assurance that the UK will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NonNuclear Weapons States Party to, and in compliance with their obligations under, the NPT.
The threshold for the legitimate use of nuclear weapons is clearly an extremely high one. We
would only consider using nuclear weapons in self-defence, including in defence of our
NATO allies, and even then only in extreme circumstances.
The use of nuclear weapons is governed by the same principles of international humanitarian
law that govern the use of other weapons. This was confirmed by the International Court of
Justice in their 1996 Advisory Opinion. This opinion also rejected the argument that use of
nuclear weapons would necessarily be unlawful in all circumstances.
Multilateral cooperation
As well as these important unilateral steps, the UK has been working hard to make progress
multilaterally.
The P5 Conference in Paris in June 2011 was a vital opportunity for the five nuclear weapon
states to meet a year after the RevCon, to focus on the disarmament-specific commitments in
the NPT Action Plan, and to map out a way forward. We agreed on new confidence-building
disarmament initiatives, including a nuclear weapons definitions working group, which will
help establish mutual understanding and facilitate future P5 consultations. We look forward
to continuing our discussions across the NPT Action Plan with our P5 partners, and to
reporting further the ways in which we are delivering against our commitments.
The disarmament pillar of the NPT is, of course, primarily about the particular
responsibilities of the P5 to work towards the requirements of Article VI. But we must not
forget that all Parties to the NPT share responsibility across the three pillars to deliver against
the agreed Action Plan - and to report their progress in doing so. The Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative is a great example of countries taking a lead to make cross-pillar
progress. And so the UK has been collaborating not only with the P5, but with Non-Nuclear
Weapons States to make disarmament progress.
UK – Norway Initiative
We have been working with Norway since 2007 on ground breaking research into the
verification of nuclear warhead dismantlement. The work is founded on two principles: that
any future process will need to be underpinned by a verification regime that can demonstrate
with confidence that disarmament has taken place. And secondly: that Non-Nuclear Weapons
States can also play a critical role in creating the conditions for disarmament and fulfilling
their own obligations under Article VI of the NPT. The UK-Norway Initiative has focused on
the joint development of effective and mutually trusted solutions to technical and procedural
disarmament hurdles which will not breach our respective non-proliferation obligations under
the NPT.

Check against delivery

3

Since the Review Conference, we have been working hard with Norway to take forward the
Initiative. In 2010, we hosted a managed access exercise in the UK. In December 2011, we
hosted with Norway a technically-focused workshop in London to share our progress with
technical experts from twelve non-nuclear weapon states that had expressed an interest in our
research. The workshop was invaluable for sharing information with Non-Nuclear Weapons
States about the real and practical challenges that disarmament is likely to pose in the
future. And, as announced at the Paris P5 Conference, on 4 April this year the UK hosted a
meeting with our P5 partners at which British technical experts shared the outcomes and
lessons from the UK-Norway Initiative, and P5 experts offered their own perspectives. We
look forward to welcoming delegations to a presentation of the 2010 exercise, the December
workshop and our forward plan for the Initiative in Room M3 at 1pm today.
In addition to the work that the UK has been doing unilaterally, bilaterally and with the other
Nuclear Weapons States and Non-Nuclear Weapons States on nuclear disarmament, we
continue to press strongly for progress on the other key instruments that will help us to move
towards the ultimate goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
CTBT
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty continues to be one of
the UK’s key disarmament priorities. We were one of the first countries to sign and ratify the
Treaty, and continue to maintain a voluntary moratorium on nuclear test explosions. The UK
has been working hard to encourage ratification by those Annex II countries that need to
ratify the treaty for it to enter into force. We congratulate Indonesia, Ghana, Guatemala and
Guinea on their ratifications during the past year, bringing the treaty closer to universality.
We also welcome Niue’s signature in the last month, following their participation in a UKfunded project to promote ratification among small island countries.
The UK continues to work to build up all elements of the Treaty’s regime: we provide expert
advice in seismology and radiochemistry to help establish a viable verification regime, ready
for entry into force. In November 2011 we co-hosted with the CTBT Organisation a P5
experts meeting in Edinburgh on improving the international community’s ability to detect
underground nuclear weapon tests.
Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty
We urgently want to see the start of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a
Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty. The UK remains firmly committed to an FMCT. With a
verifiable treaty in place, we will be a significant step closer to our goal of a world without
nuclear weapons. Without an FMCT, we still have no legally binding way of putting a stop to
the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons. And yet another year has gone
by with the CD still unable to start negotiations or even agree to a Programme of Work. The
P5 have been working together on the commitment that we made in Paris to renew efforts to
promote negotiations in the CD, and we will continue to do so. Not only are reinvigorated CD
efforts important in their own right, but are incumbent upon the NPT community to deliver as
one of the key recommendations in the 2010 Action Plan.
Check against delivery

4

Conclusion
Mr Chairman, I will conclude by reiterating the UK’s commitment to take tangible and
mutually reinforcing steps that show we are serious about disarmament, that reduce
incentives to others to proliferate, and that create the conditions and confidence for others to
take their own steps, working towards our shared long-term goal of a world without nuclear
weapons.

Check against delivery

5

