2018 Preparatory Committee fo r the 2020 Review Conference
of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear \/Veapons
Pillar I
Statement by the United Kingdom
Mr Chairman ,
As we set out in our General Statement, the backdrop is more difficult than for many years.
The future is deeply uncertain. There is an increas ingly clear line between States who
uphold the international arms control framework and non-proliferation system and States
who undermine it. We must be clear about where responsib ility lies for these steps
backwards, and also united and resolute in our determina tion to deter threat s and face
down those who are seeking to underm ine decad es of progress.
Other states continu e to develop new nuclear capable missile systems that we assesswill
undermine strategic stability and there is a continu ing risk of further proliferation of nuclear
wea pons. There is a risk that states might use their nuclear capability to threat en us or try
to constrain our decision making in a crisis.
In these circumstance s, abandoning Britain's nuclear deterrent

unilaterally would

underm,ne our security, that of our Allies and that of all States. It would not make anyone
safer.
So the UK will maintain its nuclear deterrent for the foreseea ble future. But we are a
responsible nuclear weapon State. We would emp loy our nuclear weap ons only in
extreme circumstan ces of self-defence, including the defence of our NATO Allies. And we
continue to offer the assurance that the UK will not use, or threat en to use, nuclear
weapons against any Non-Nuclear Weapons State party to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons not in material breach of those non-proliferation
obligations .
Mr Chairman,
We are comm itted to the achieveme nt of Arti cle VI under the NPT.
We firmly believe a consensus , step- by-step approach to multi lateral disarmament is the
best way of mak ing progr ess toward s our shared goal of a world without nuclear weapons.

There is no doubt the security situation is difficult, but even in this challenging context we
can move closer towards verifiable, treaty-based disarmament. To take one example, we
play a leading role on nuclear disarmament verification to build "strict and effect ive
international controls". We are an active member of the International Partnership on
Nuclear Disarmament Verification where we will create the toolbox for a future verification
regime. We have tackled the technical challenges of verification in Exercise Letterpress;
for the first time working multilaterally with both Nuclear Weapon States and non-Nuclear
Weapon States at a site previously used to hold nuclear weapons.
The UK is committed to a posture of minimum credible deterrence. A single submarine on
patrol provides continuous at sea deterrence and does not target its weapons at any State.
In January 2015, we delivered on our Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010
commitment to reduce the number of deployed warheads on each SSBN from 48 to 40.
We also announced that we have reduced the number of operationally available warheads
to no more than 120 and we remain committed to further reduce our overall nuclear
weapon stockpile to no more than 180 warheads by the middle of the 2020s.
We continue to press for the entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear test ban
treaty; to support the work of the Comprehensive Test Ban Organisation ; and to call for
successful negotiations in the CD on a fissile material cut-off treaty. We have had a
voluntary moratorium on the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices since 1995, and have declared the amount of fissile
material produced prior to the onset of that moratorium.
Mr Chairman,
The UK remains determined to make progress against Article VI of the NPT despite the
actions of States such as Russia and DPRK. But we must maintain our capability to
deter the most extreme threats to our way of life. We will continue to work with partners
across the international community, both Nuclear Weapons States and Non-Nuclear
Weapons States, to prevent proliferation, to make progress on effective international
controls, to build trust and confidence between states, and to take tangible steps toward
a safer and more stable world in which countries with nuclear weapons feel able to
relinquish them.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.

