2015 Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons: New York, 27 April – 22 May 2015
Main Committee I
Statement by Mr. Guy Pollard MBE
Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
to the Conference on Disarmament

Mr Chairman,
At the outset the United Kingdom would like to align itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union.
Mr Chairman,
The UK has made a strong contribution to the overall reductions in the global
stockpile of all types of nuclear weapons. In the late 1970s, when the UK‟s stockpile
was at its highest, the UK had approximately 460 warheads in-service across five
types. Since the end of the Cold War, the UK has steadily reduced the size of its
nuclear forces and since 1998, has reduced to a single platform, a single delivery
system and a single design of warhead.
In January we announced that the commitments made following the 2010 Review
Conference to reduce the number of operationally available warheads had been
implemented across the submarine fleet. We have reduced the number of warheads
on each of our deployed ballistic missile submarines from 48 to 40, and the number
of operational missiles on each of those submarines to no more than eight.
This takes our total number of operationally available warheads to no more than 120.
This will enable us to reduce our overall nuclear warhead stockpile to not more than
180 by the mid 2020s.
The UK also has a strong record of reducing the role and significance of nuclear
weapons in our defence and security policy. The UK views its nuclear weapons as a
strategic deterrent - they are political, not military weapons. We would employ
nuclear weapons only in extreme circumstances of self-defence, including the
defence of our NATO Allies, and would not use any of our weapons contrary to
international law.
UK nuclear weapons are not on high alert, nor are they on a “launch on warning”
status. The patrol submarine operates routinely at a “notice to fire” measured in
days, rather than in minutes, which was the case during the Cold War. Since May
1994, patrol submarines‟ missiles have been de-targeted.
In support of transparency on all issues relating to nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, we issued in 2014, a report in response to the call in Action 5 of the
2010 Action plan. We sought feedback from civil-society and non-nuclear weapon
states, in the light of which we released a revised version in February.
Check against delivery

Mr Chairman,
We recognise the role that Negative Security Assurances can play in strengthening
the NPT regime. That was why we gave a revised assurance during this review cycle
that “the UK will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear
weapons states parties to the NPT”. In giving this assurance, we emphasise the
need for universal adherence to the NPT and note that this assurance would not
apply to any state in material breach of their non-proliferation obligations.
By ratifying protocols to the existing treaties on nuclear weapon free zones, the UK
has given assurances to around 100 countries covering much of the globe including
regions as diverse as Africa, Latin America and the Pacific. We are pleased to have
signed and ratified the Protocol to the Central Asia Nuclear Weapon Free Zone
Treaty in the last twelve months.
Further progress on NWFZs will provide credible, regional, internationally binding
legal instruments on negative security assurances which many are looking for. We
will continue to engage with State Parties to the SEANWFZ Treaty in order to
facilitate signature of the relevant Protocol in the near future.
Mr Chairman,
The UK was among the first States to sign and ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. We have maintained a voluntary moratorium on nuclear test
explosions since 1991. We now provide extensive technical, financial and expert
support to the three pillars of the CTBTO‟s verification system. We oppose calls from
some states to cut funding to the CTBTO‟s technical organs. We have actively
engaged in EU and P5 work streams aimed at improving the International Monitoring
System and regularly sponsor projects in support of the CTBTO. A recent example is
a successful workshop providing training on using new open sources tools and
technologies for verification purposes. The UK played an active role in Integrated
Field Exercise 2014 (IFE 14) providing a significant amount of equipment and
technical expertise to the exercise. We believe that IFE 14 has demonstrated a step
change in the CTBTO‟s On Site Inspection capability.
The UK announced in 1995 that it had ceased the production of fissile material for
use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. All facilities used for the
production of fissile materials for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices in the UK have either been decommissioned, or are undergoing
decommissioning, or are now used for peaceful purposes only.
All enrichment and reprocessing in the UK since 1995 has been conducted under
Euratom safeguards and the terms of the UK/Euratom/IAEA Safeguards Agreement,
and all civil nuclear material in the UK is subject to these arrangements. In 1998 the
UK placed nuclear material excess to defence requirements under international
safeguards.
The UK sees the start and early conclusion of negotiations of a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices as an essential step on the road to complete global nuclear disarmament.

Check against delivery

The negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty, in the Conference on
Disarmament, further to the adoption of a balanced and comprehensive Programme
of Work, is a priority for us. In this regard, we are pleased the Group of Government
Experts established on this issue was able to produce a substantive report and
commend the efforts of Ambassador Golberg for her chairing of the Group.
Mr Chairman
Verification is likely to play an increasing and crucial role in disarmament measures.
The UK is a world leader on research into developing verification capabilities of
warhead dismantlement, on which the UK-Norway Initiative, the first and only such
established project between an NWS and an NNWS, continues to make progress.
We will host two side events on this work on 4 and 7 May. The UK also has a longrunning bilateral verification research programme with the US able to focus on
different aspects of verification than the UKNI work. It will also be the subject of a
side event on 11 May. The UK will continue its work on disarmament verification
during the next Review Cycle, including within the International Partnership on
Nuclear Disarmament Verification recently established by the United States.
In 2009, the UK established the „P5 Process‟ to discuss disarmament issues. The P5
process serves two purposes – to build trust and confidence between P5 members
and to build trust and confidence between the P5 and the rest of the world that the
P5 are working together to take forward their disarmament commitments. We were
very pleased that the P5 London Conference in February included a session with
NNWS for the first time.
During this review cycle, the Process has enabled the P5 to report on progress
against these commitments in a common format for the first time. The UK is
committed to maintaining this level of transparency, and we anticipate reporting to
the NPT States Parties during the next Review Cycle, in line with Action 21. The
production of a Glossary has established a useful working method for the P5; with
this in place we hope that the P5 can go on to discuss definitions of more difficult
terms related to disarmament and strategic stability.
The very process of the P5 discussing these difficult issues has made an important
start to improving mutual transparency between the P5. We believe the P5 Process
is key to finding realistic and sustainable ways forward on multilateral disarmament.
The United Kingdom will retain a credible and effective minimum nuclear deterrent
for as long as the global security situation makes it necessary. However we remain
committed to our obligations under Article VI and have made significant reductions to
our nuclear weapons. The UK will remain at the forefront of global efforts to pursue a
world without nuclear weapons.
Thank you Mr Chairman.

Check against delivery

Mr Chairman
We thank you for your continued efforts to produce a text on which consensus
can be found. I will make some preliminary remarks. We will provide you with
some detailed comments on the manuscript which I would hope to have the
opportunity to discuss with you.

Mr Chairman

Despite comments made by some yesterday, it is a consensus that we should
be looking for. How can anything other than a consensual outcome strengthen
this treaty? A non-consensual outcome would indicate that there were very
different interpretations of the treaty or of its implementation. That must mean
a weakening of the treaty overall.

There were several comments yesterday about the need to listen to the
majority.

We have just listened again to the statement by Austria on behalf of 159
countries that they made almost three weeks ago.

To simply re-read that statement is to imply that the debate has not moved on,
and that we’ve all been wasting our time for three weeks. The debate has
moved on. We are still a long way from consensus, but we are closer than we
were a week ago. Re-reading the statement at this stage does not

demonstrate that others have not been listening, it simply demonstrates that
those who first read it have not.

We have listened, and we have listened carefully.

We hear a majority say they are more concerned about the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons than they were before. We acknowledge
that this raised awareness needs to be addressed in the report, most
appropriately in the preamble or chapeau which is where this language sits in
the NPT itself and in the 2010 outcome document.

We hear a majority of countries say that nuclear weapons should never be
used again under any circumstances. While we respect that view, that is
language which cannot command consensus because to sign up to it would
contradict our policy of nuclear deterrence. We will not knowingly sign up to
something contradictory and we will not be changing our deterrent policy in
the next 10 days.

For this same reason we will need to delete point 6 at paragraph 42: we are
committed to a world free of nuclear weapons but until the conditions permit
that – and we will work to establish those conditions - we will keep a credible
minimum deterrent. Making the commitment at point 6 could mean that we will
not be able to make to make the changes necessary to maintain the credibility
of our deterrent. We cannot know how security conditions and other
capabilities will evolve. We would note that we do everything we can to avoid
the use of nuclear weapons, and that they have not been used for almost 70
years.

We also hear a majority of states say that awareness of the HINW should be
raised. We see a response to this argument at point 18 of paragraph 42.

As I said Mr Chairman, we listen carefully. Sometimes we hear the majority
being invoked on an issue for which the majority has not obviously voiced an
opinion.

I was surprised to hear some insisting that the draft needs to note the
outcome of the conferences on the HINW. As I understand it, even states that
attended those conferences did not all sign up to those outcomes. To my
knowledge, those outcomes were issued in the names of the respective Chair.

So how many states have endorsed those outcomes? There was a suggestion
that all 159 states who put their names to the statement by Austria have. But
have they? That statement refers to those conferences and quotes from some
of the outcome language but there’s nothing in that statement that explicitly
endorses those outcomes in their entirety.

We are also quite clear that only a proportion of those that have expressed
their concern about the HINW support the concept that there is a legal gap in
the NPT. It is a smaller proportion of that group that believes that gap must be
filled by a legal framework and only a further subdivision of that proportion that
insists the legal framework must take the form of a nuclear weapons
convention or a ban treaty.

We will not agree that there is a gap in the NPT to be filled or a framework to
be established by single legal instrument.

As I made clear in an earlier statement, a nuclear weapons convention could
well be needed in the future, but as a means of maintaining a world free from
nuclear weapons, not as a means of getting us to that point. We could
consider some language on this issue framed in those terms, similar to that
used in previous outcome documents.

As I also made clear, a ban treaty would be nothing more than a referendum
on the NPT. It risks being deeply damaging to the environment of security that

the NPT has created and maintains, and to the trust that underpins the
transfer of proliferation sensitive technology. We are supposed to be looking
at actions to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty, not damage it, and
we are not prepared to agree a text that leaves the door open on such a
possibility.

Nor can we accept the notion that actions can only be considered
disarmament if they have taken place within the context of a multilateral
framework. To do so would deny actions that have cut Cold War arsenals by
80%. It would we to deny unilateral steps that have taken courage to
implement and of which we are justifiably proud. Saying that disarmament has
not taken place does not move the debate on.

We hear the calls for time frames and benchmarks for disarmament. In 2010
we agreed to a timeframe on reporting which we honoured. We do not rule out
identifying timeframes and/or benchmarks for commitments made in this
RevCon’s outcome document. But we cannot set out a timeframe for the
complete elimination of our nuclear weapons. It would be meaningless, and
act neither as a spur nor an incentive.

We hear the criticism of the P5 process. But what makes a greater
contribution to disarmament: a conference to raise awareness of the HINW
attended by almost all the NNWS or a meeting to build trust attended by all
the nuclear weapons states, trust which will be necessary to underpin
concrete steps on disarmament?

The P5 process was criticised for being small and exclusive. Its size is a
function of this Treaty to which we are all states parties. It was clear when we
each signed up to the Treaty that there would be five parties that had a
different status under the treaty to everyone else.

The P5 process was also criticised for being opaque. We have endeavoured
to improve transparency. Recent P5 meetings have had sessions to which
civil society and the media have been invited. For the first time, at the P5

Conference in London, a session was held with NNWS. And over the last 12
months he P5 have had a sustained dialogue with the countries of the NPDI.

We listen carefully and hear that the UKNI attracts praise for being a
partnership between a NWS and a NNWS.

We would be keen to build on these approaches, building genuine
partnerships between NWS and NNWS.

Mr Chairman

The outcome in 2010 was a very significant achievement. That it was so
significant would make building upon it a challenge at the best of times. The
current security climate means that these are not the best of the times. That
said, we fully recognise that a simple reaffirmation of the 2010 outcome would
indicate stagnation within the regime, and that we must find further
incremental steps to take forward in the coming Review Cycle.

We would welcome a signal from others of their willingness to work together to
identify actions and commitments to strengthen the Treat’s implementation
that can find consensus. In the restatement of positions adopted at the
beginning of this RevCon, we do not hear that willingness.

Thank you.


