STATEMENT
by the delegation of Ukraine at the First session of

the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Nuclear disarmament (cluster 1)
Ukraine reiterates its conviction that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only
absolute guarantee against their proliferation or use or threat of use. Ukraine welcomes the
nuclear disarmament steps taken recently by nuclear-weapon states and calls on all states
possessing nuclear weapons to pursue further negotiations on nuclear disarmament bilaterally
and/or multilaterally.
The political will is imperative for further cuts of the nuclear armaments. We believe
that in the light of the UN SC Resolution 1887 (2009) all nuclear weapon states should join the
efforts of the two largest nuclear powers on downsizing their nuclear potential. Ukraine also calls
on nuclear states outside the NPT, pending their accession to the Treaty, to undertake unilateral
obligations not to build up their nuclear arsenals.
We call on all states possessing nuclear weapons to apply the principles of
irreversibility and verifiability to disarmament process. Meanwhile, it is important to decrease
the operational status of existing nuclear weapon systems. Ukraine believes that states,
possessing nuclear weapons, have to commit themselves to reducing the role of such weapons in
their national security strategies.
Ukraine believes that transparency with regard to nuclear weapons capabilities,
including through reporting regularly such information as the numbers of nuclear weapons and
their delivery systems, and on their deployment status is a proof of nuclear-weapon states'
commitment to nuclear disarmament. We welcome the US decision announced at 2010 NPT
Review Conference regarding the publication of its nuclear holdings.
The important elements of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament are the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Fissile Material Cut Off Treaty.
Ukraine urges all states that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the CTBT at the
earliest opportunity with a view to its early entry into force and emphasizes the importance of
maintaining the moratorium on nuclear weapons testing pending the entry into force of that
Treaty.
Ukraine deeply regrets the lack of substantial progress in the Conference on
Disarmament on the issue of the FMCT. We support the immediate commencement and early
conclusion of negotiations on this treaty, while urging all states possessing nuclear weapons to
declare and maintain a moratorium on the production of fissile material for weapons purposes, to
declare voluntarily fissile material that is no longer required for military purposes and to place
such material under the IAEA safeguards or other relevant international verification
mechanisms. An exchange of information on all nuclear programs and fissile materials stocks
could also contribute to the confidence building measures.
Ukraine believes that an appropriate form for reaching complete nuclear disarmament is
the proper implementation of the previously agreed multilateral commitments, undertaken under
decision 1, 2 of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, 13 steps towards nuclear
disarmament of 2000 and the plan for "64 actions" of the Final Document of2010 NPT Review
Conference, which has the fundamental importance to the international community.

