Check against delivery

STATEMENT
by H.E. Ambassador Yurii KLYMENKO,
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations Office and other
International Organizations in Geneva
Nuclear disarmament and security assurances (cluster 1)
(April 26, 2018, Geneva)
Mr Chairman,
While aligning with the statement of the European Union delivered
yesterday, I would like to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
Mr Chairman,
We consistently stand for reducing the nuclear arsenals, stopping the
modernization of nuclear weapons, and overall decrease of nuclear weapons' role
in military and strategic doctrines of states. While recognizing the difficulties in
the implementation of existing international treaties and in bringing the other ones
into force, as well as a deadlock in the global disarmament negotiations, we
reaffirm our commitment to maintaining and strengthening the NPT, as well as
broader international cooperation in order to reinforce the non-proliferation regime
and the NPT review process.
Mr Chairman,
We look forward to practical progress on achieving the objective of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear-weapons.
The approach in this area of Ukraine, which 32 years ago exactly on this
date faced the Chomobyl nuclear disaster, was embodied in abandoning its nuclear
capability and acceding to the NPT in 1994. Concrete steps were taken to eliminate
the use of highly enriched uranium for civilian purposes through the removal of all
of its existing stocks from Ukraine in 2012.

Ukraine's historic decision to renounce its nuclear weapons was backed up
by international security guarantees, enshrined in the Budapest Memorandum.
Nevertheless, 20 years later, one nuclear weapon state-signatory violated
almost every point of the above-mentioned document, attempting to annex a part of
Ukraine's sovereign territory by military force, and waging a hybrid war in the
eastern part of Ukraine.
If anyone would even implicitly accept the intervention of this kind, then the
NPT seems to be in as much jeopardy as Ukrainian territory as a result of outside
aggression.
Mr Chairman,
Another serious challenge for the international nuclear dismmament and
non-proliferation process is North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs.
In this regard, Ukraine shares the common view of necessity to address the
North-Korean nuclear threat collectively and resolutely.

Illegal activity of Pyongyang urges the international community to undertake
in-depth investigation into the development of the North Korean nuclear and
missile programmes and expose any possible foreign assistance and technology
transfers to Pyongyang in this area.
Ukraine remains ready for substantial work with all states on this matter with
an aim to ensure positive changes in the current situation and move closer to
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

Mr Chairman,
This year marks the golden jubilee of the NPT. Does it mean that the world
has become more safe and reliable since inception date of the Treaty? It is upon all
of us to decide.
Let's not forget that Ukraine, which voluntarily renounced its nuclear
arsenal, has become a victim of the aggression from one of the nuclear states. The
brutal violation of the Budapest Memorandum by it seriously challenges the global
security. Such development makes of exceptional importance the restoration of
confidence to security assurances.
The above-mentioned is also relevant from the point of view of excluding
the occurrence of such situations in the future. That is why achievement of real
collective security assurances remains a key task of our agenda.
Mr Chairman,
We deem necessary to urgently develop and conclude a multilateral legally
binding instrument in order to provide security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
states against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Ukraine is convinced that granting credible security assurances in the form
of an international legally binding instrument will substantially enhance the
nuclear non-proliferation regime, improve mutual trust and overall stability.
Non-nuclear states must be provided with substantive international support
based on the concrete security assurances in a crisis situation.
To conclude, Mr Chairman, let me express a belief that the total elimination
of nuclear weapons, irrespective of different positions on the means how to achieve
it, is the only absolute guarantee against the scourge of nuclear warfare.

I thank you.

