Mr. Chairman,
At the outset, and on behalf of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations, it gives me great pleasure to begin my statement by congratulating you on your election as Chairman of this important committee. Given your valuable diplomatic experience in issues concerning disarmament, we are confident that you will competently lead the activities of this committee, and we wish you success.
I would also like to associate myself with the representative of Malaysia in his statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement, and confirm our support to his views which if adopted will help in strengthening measures of building confidence among states and achieving regional and international peace and stability.
Mr. Chairman,
The danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons is no longer limited to the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons by nuclear states, for it also includes declared and undeclared attempts of other countries to produce or acquire such weapons in accordance with their own understanding of security deterrence, which prevailed during the cold war.
The United Arab Emirates follows up international reports issued in this regard closely, which indicated that thousands of nuclear weapons, especially strategic and offensive weapons, are manufactured in several regions of the world. The UAE is deeply alarmed at the unsuccessful efforts of the international community towards achieving an actual progress in systematic reduction of such dangerous weapons in accordance with the NPT Treaty, which is considered the cornerstone of international efforts aiming at the disarmament of strategic weapons and the banning of the vertical and horizontal proliferation of these weapons. The UAE believes that this situation may deepen sense of mistrust among states and obstruct initiatives aiming at strengthening peace, cooperation and development. Therefore, we invite the international community through this important gathering to give priority to the following procedures:
systematic and full destruction of nuclear weapons, and acceleration of negotiations that lead to full implementation of the 13 steps agreed on in the Review Conference of year 2000. These 13 steps call for dismantling nuclear weapons and their transport methods within a specific multilaterally agreed upon timeframe and in accordance with the UN Charter and article 6 of the NPT.
Providing necessary safeguards to non-nuclear states to ensure their protection from threats of use of these dangerous weapons, which should include an international legally binding instrument which obligates nuclear states to refrain, unconditionally and indiscriminately, from using or threatening to use such weapons against any non-nuclear state under any circumstances.
Issuing recommendations aiming at strengthening the mandate of the Disarmament Conference to enable it t3 establish specialized committees and international arrangements for addressing challenges which prevent the international community from reaching an agreement on a phase, program aiming at total destruction of nuclear weapons, and prohibiting the production, development, acquisition, stockpiling, transport, and use of these weapons or threat to use them.
Call upon states, which have not yet acceded to the NPT, in particularly Israel, to accede unconditionally and £.s soon as possible to the Treaty. Those states must subject their nuclear facilities to the supervision and safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency in order to enhance the universality of the above Treaty,
Ensure early enforcement of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty)' which commits states to end their nuclear tests, which represents the most important step of the 13 steps aiming at the total destruction of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
While we attach great importance to regional and international arrangements, made for enhancing disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, we hope deliberations of this committee will help in converging our views on these important questions and achieving the objectives of this review conference, including increasing confidence among states and creating a safe and secure international environment where expectations of our people for achieving sustainable development may be realized.
Thank you Mr. Chairman	s

