NPT Cluster 1
Statement by the United States
April 25, 2013
Geneva Switzerland
Mr. Chairman,
From the outset of his administration, President Obama has supported the goal of a
world without nuclear weapons, and the solid practical steps that the United States
is taking to move in that direction. This step-by-step approach to disarmament is
the most effective means to increase stability, reduce nuclear dangers, and fulfill
our obligations under the NPT.
The U.S. leads by example in fulfilling obligations under the NPT and the
commitments set out in the 2010 NPT Review Conference Action Plan. The
United States is committed to the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and
transparency for nuclear disarmament. The United States is also working with
other NPT Parties to implement the Action Plan across all three pillars.
The United States has been reducing its nuclear weapons for more than four
decades. By September 2009, the U.S. nuclear stockpile was reduced by 84
percent to approximately 5,000 nuclear warheads from its peak of approximately
31,000 nuclear warheads in 1967. During this period, the United States
unilaterally reduced its non-strategic nuclear warheads by 90 percent.
The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) between the United
States and Russia, now in its third successful year in force demonstrates our
commitment to the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. When the Treaty
limits apply in 2018, the strategic nuclear forces of the United States and Russia
will be capped at their lowest level since the 1950s. The rigorous and extensive
provisions of the Treaty testify to the importance of transparency and effective
verification in providing predictability and stability in international relations. I
hope delegations were able to hear Acting Undersecretary Gottemoeller’s briefing
on New START with her counterpart negotiator Russian Deputy Defense Minister
Antonov.
When President Obama signed New START in 2012, he made clear his
commitment to further reductions and to pursuing discussions with Russia on
further reductions in all categories of nuclear weapons − strategic, non-strategic,
1

deployed and non-deployed. In his 2013 State of the Union address, the President
reiterated his commitment to further reductions in the nuclear arsenals of the
United States and Russia. To this end, the United States seeks to promote strategic
stability and increase transparency on a reciprocal basis with Russia. Earlier this
month, the President’s National Security Advisor had comprehensive and
constructive discussions with several Russian officials, including President Putin,
on a range of bilateral and global issues.
NATO has also made clear that it will consider further reducing its requirement for
non-strategic nuclear weapons in the context of reciprocal steps by Russia, taking
into account the disparity between Russian and U.S. non-strategic nuclear weapon
stockpiles in Europe.
The goal of a world without nuclear weapons will not be reached quickly. It will
take sustained commitment and persistence and must be pursued through concrete,
practical steps. In seeking this goal, the United States holds to the basic principles
that it outlined in its 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, the NPR: preventing nuclear
proliferation and terrorism; reducing the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national
strategy; maintaining strategic deterrence and stability at reduced force levels;
reassuring U.S. allies and partners; and sustaining a safe, secure and effective
nuclear arsenal as long as nuclear weapons exist.
With regard to modernization, the 2010 NPR made clear that the United States will
not develop new nuclear warheads neither will it support new military missions nor
provide for new military capabilities The United States has significantly reduced
the role of nuclear weapons in U.S. national security and military strategy. Further
steps can and should be taken. The fundamental role of U.S. nuclear weapons is to
deter nuclear attack on the United States, our allies, and partners. We will work to
establish the conditions under which a universal policy that makes deterrence of
nuclear attack the sole purpose of nuclear weapons could be safely adopted.
The United States has also demonstrated leadership through unilateral transparency
measures. U.S. released in 2010 its nuclear weapons stockpile figures and
articulated in the NPR the reduced role of nuclear weapons. The U.S. nuclear
community is exploring the technical steps needed to ensure irreversibility,
verifiability, and transparency for further nuclear disarmament and we are also
considering ways to collaborate with other NPT Parties in this undertaking.
Since the 2010 NPT Review Conference, the five nuclear-weapon States under the
NPT (or “P5”) have met regularly to address and make progress on our
2

commitments under the 2010 NPT Action Plan. Last week, Russia hosted the
fourth successful P5 Conference. The P5 process has expanded the long-standing
U.S.-Russia nuclear disarmament dialogue into an ongoing process of P5
engagement, consistent with our obligations under Article VI of the NPT and our
commitments under the Action Plan.
In the area of nuclear testing, President Obama pledged that his Administration
would pursue U.S. ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT). The Administration has been engaging with the U.S. Senate and laying
the groundwork for positive Senate reconsideration of the Treaty. The United
States is vigorously supporting completion of the CTBT’s monitoring and
verification regime though both assessed and substantial voluntary funding.
Since 1992, the United States has maintained a voluntary moratorium on nuclear
explosive testing. The NPR reiterated that the United States no longer requires
nuclear explosive testing to ensure the safety and effectiveness of our remaining
nuclear weapons, relying instead on our long-standing Stockpile Stewardship
Program. The United States calls upon all states, to refrain from nuclear testing.
I recall the joint statement by the P-5 on April 19 that affirmed the joint concern
about the serious challenge posed by nuclear test conducted by the DPRK on
February 12.
With regard to fissile material, the United States has not produced highly enriched
uranium (HEU) for weapons since 1964 nor produced plutonium for weapons since
1988. The United States has worked with Russia to eliminate excess stocks of
fissile material that could be used in nuclear warheads. Under the 1993 U.S.Russia HEU Purchase Agreement, 472 metric tons of Russian weapons-origin
HEU, which is equivalent to about 18,900 nuclear weapons, has now been downblended for use as commercial reactor fuel in the United States; that number is
expected to reach the Agreement’s 500-metric ton target within this calendar year.
In 2011, the United States and Russia brought the Plutonium Management and
Disposition Agreement and its Protocols into force, committing each country to
dispose of at least 34 metric tons of excess weapon-grade plutonium. This is
enough for approximately 17,000 nuclear weapons. Disposition will be subject to
IAEA monitoring and will irreversibly transform the material into forms that
cannot be used for nuclear weapons.
As we dispose of existing stocks of fissile material, the United States remains
certain that a verified end to the production of fissile material for use in nuclear
weapons is both essential and the next logical multilateral step towards
3

disarmament. We have been working to initiate negotiations on a Fissile Material
Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) in the Conference on Disarmament (CD), and we are
disappointed at the CD’s lack of progress. We are also endeavoring to use
available opportunities on the margins of the CD to make progress toward FMCT
negotiations, including serious consultations among the states that would be
directly affected by an FMCT. We are hopeful that the UN Group of
Governmental Experts to be established by UN General Assembly Resolution
67/53 will also provide an impetus to the CD.
Since the darkest days of the Cold War, the United States has fully understood and
shares concerns about the profound and serious consequences that would result
from the use of nuclear weapons. We accord the highest priority to avoiding such
use. As President Reagan said in 1984, “A nuclear war cannot be won and must
never be fought.” It is in our interest, as well as that of all nations, that the now
nearly 68-year record of non-use of nuclear weapons be extended forever. As
stated in the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, the United States would only consider
the use of nuclear weapons under the most extreme circumstances to defend the
vital interests of the United States or its allies and partners.
The United States recognizes the special responsibility of the NPT nuclear-weapon
States to make progress toward nuclear disarmament. But all NPT Parties can
contribute to the Treaty’s disarmament goals, both by pursuing disarmament steps
themselves, such as initiating FMCT negotiations and adherence to the CTBT, and
by helping to create the conditions for such progress. Progress on disarmament
under the NPT is integrally linked to nonproliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, for which we all have shared responsibility – nuclear-weapon States and
non-nuclear weapon States alike.
The U.S. working paper on disarmament submitted at this Preparatory Committee
session provides additional details regarding U.S. progress toward nuclear
disarmament, as well as a synopsis of U.S. non-nuclear disarmament and arms
control efforts. I commend it to our colleagues.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that while much progress has been achieved,
much remains to be done. The United States will continue to work step by step
towards fulfilling our obligations under Article VI of the NPT and our
commitments under the Action Plan across all three NPT pillars. We urge other
NPT Parties to do the same. As Article VI makes clear, all NPT Parties have a role
to play in disarmament.

4

Let me conclude with an all too brief tribute to George Bunn who just passed
away. George Bunn was one of my predecessors as US Ambassador to the CD.
He played a crucial role, together with Soviet negotiators, in finding creative and
enduring language during the negotiation of the NPT, the landmark treaty that
unites us in the hall today. He was an extraordinary man who left an extraordinary
legacy.

5

