1

Statement by the Argentine Delegation during the First Session of
the Preparatory Committee for the
2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT - Cluster 3
2 – 12 May 2017, Vienna
To be delivered by H.E. Ambassador Rafael Mariano GROSSI,
Permanent Representative of the Argentine Republic
- check against delivery Mr. Chairman,

The peaceful uses of nuclear energy are, without a doubt, key issues in
the “grand bargain” struck over fifty years ago by the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. Building on and strengthening the work so far by many State
parties to the Treaty and facilitating access to the benefits of the atom
for development through the nuclear applications in the fields of health,
agriculture, water management and other that are essential to
sustainable development must be one of the highlights of the current
Review process.

In recent years, and in spite of the undeniable impact of the
Fukushima-Daiichi accident, the production of nuclear energy receives
a renewed level of attention and new undertakings are coming up for
the construction of new power plants, including in Argentina. This
positive situation benefits from renewed perspectives on the issue,

2

given the new appreciation for nuclear energy generation in the light of
the urgent need for clean energy sources that do not aggravate global
warming nor add to the global carbon emissions. Argentina is one of
the countries that found the adequate environment to develop its
nuclear program for peaceful uses over fifty years ago, within the
“grand bargain” of the NPT. The current review process towards NPT
2020 finds us busy with projects in a number of fields – development,
building and life-extension of reactors; building research reactors; fuel
cycle; spent fuel management and Low Enriched Uranium; and
technical cooperation, in particular at regional level.

Mr. Chairman,
The positive cycle for nuclear energy and applications was positively
reinforced by the inclusion of energy issues in the Sustainable
Development Agenda 2030. The 2030 Agenda is a multilateral platform
that is widely regarded by States as a tool to foster economic, social
and environmental development – the three elements of sustainable
development, with an additional angle provided by the explicit objective
of building peaceful societies. The points in common between the NPT
and the 2030 Agenda are not limited, therefore, to the energy issues,

3

captured in the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7, the
commitment to ensure universal access to energy services that are
reliable, sustainable, modern and affordable. There is an active debate
today on the possible contribution that the promotion of nuclear energy
for development can make to fulfill, not only SDG 7, but the 2030
Agenda as a whole, through innovative technologies.

The NPT offers the necessary and adequate framework for such
promotion, which can be linked not only to SDG 7 on energy but also to
the SDG 16 -which establishes the promotion of fairer, more peaceful
and more inclusive societies- as well as SDG 4 on education,
specifically through target 4.7 that provides for all students to have
access to the theoretical and practical knowledge needed for the
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, among other values.
Delegations

may

recall

that

the

promotion

of

education

for

disarmament was one of the main issues analyzed at the 2015
RevConf. In this regard, target 4.7 could offer objective criteria.

Mr. Chairman,

4

Our societies clearly demand greater nuclear safety, as an essential
component of any nuclear energy and applications development. My
country is one of the many that work together with the Agency to
develop the universal framework of norms and standards for nuclear
safety.
We have faced important challenges, such as the recent FukushimaDaiichi accident, which led to the adoption of the IAEA Nuclear Safety
Action Plan for the strengthening of the nuclear safety system, and
created favorable conditions for the strengthening of the Nuclear
Safety Convention and its review process. Although the Action Plan
was already finalized last year, nuclear safety continues to be an area
where further progress is needed.
The Diplomatic Conference that took place in February 2015 to
consider a proposed amendment to the Nuclear Safety Convention
was a step forward in this regard. The unanimous adoption of the
Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety found the formula to strengthen
consensus

within

the

Convention.

After

having

chaired

that

Conference, Argentina welcomes the wide acceptance that the
Declaration has received, as reflected in a number of resolutions and
working documents in the IAEA and in the reports on its application by

5

the State parties to the Nuclear Safety Convention at it Review
Conference in April 2017. The current work at the CSS is a very
positive step towards extending this agreements to all members of the
Agency, and the State parties to the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,
There exists a growing expectation, in the field of security, for the
achievements and consensus emanating from a number of dynamic
fora on nuclear security to be consolidated and integrated at the global
level, in particular the work of the IAEA with its 168 members and -why
not- reaching the 190 States parties to the NPT. As recognized by
many at the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security last December,
our efforts to include in the work of the Agency the latest debates on
issues of the highest concern as are those of nuclear security will serve
to strengthen the Agency as the foremost multilateral institution in the
field, where we can discuss, agree and operationalize high-level
consensus reached elsewhere. Several areas have been identified
where it is possible and necessary to move forward, on the basis of the
work already started within the prestigious Nuclear Security Contact
Group that met in Vienna last Friday, such as: the development of

6

guidance for Member States, including under the Nuclear Security
Series; support for the efforts of Member States to comply with their
responsibilities regarding nuclear security, through review missions
and

technical

support

for

regulatory

development;

and

the

implementation of coordinated research projects (CRPs) to lead the
collaboration among Member States to face the challenges of nuclear
security that affect several countries, among others.
Bearing in mind the importance of the cooperation in the diverse for a
that are today working at the international level, Argentina is
coordinating with Japan an exercise of dialogue and understanding
between Nuclear Customers and Suppliers established within the
IFNEC, aimed at identifying relevant issues for both parties in order to
ensure a better dissemination of nuclear technology for power uses –
giving priority attention to security and safety, the training of human
resources and capacity building, the financial aspects, social
acceptance and transparency.

Mr. Chairman,
My Delegation is persuaded that a profound reassessment of the
promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy is needed and, to that

7

end, is working in the promotional fora, including IAEA, so that the
Review Conference can achieve new concrete and ambitious goals
under this pillar of the NPT, as it does when it comes to disarmament
and to non-proliferation. This will allow us to reclaim the philosophy of
Article IV and to fulfill it in its full significance.
In this regard, this year offers two specific fora where most of the main
actors in this field will be represented, specialists that not always can
participate in our preparatory meetings that are to some degree
dominated by security experts:
- The International Conference on the Technical Cooperation
Program of IAEA, which will take place in Vienna at the end of
the month, in order to debate ways to strengthen the contribution
of the Agency to the sustainable development in each of our
countries, as well as at the global level and with regard to the
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030.
- The International Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Energy in
the Twenty-first Century, which will take place in Abu Dhabi at
the end of October next, where Argentina will have an active
participation.

8

Let’s be clear. For most of the States parties to the NPT, including
developing countries such as Argentina, the so-called Third Pillar that
deals with the promotion of peaceful activities are not an afterthought,
nor an appendix to the more “glamorous” issues linked to international
security. On the contrary, it is a fundamental pillar, that cannot be
Just relied to other institution such as the IAEA. The NPT review
cannot be complete without an in-depth evaluation of the third pillar
that leads to concrete, effective commitments to strengthen the ability
of NPT members to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
for sustainable development.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

