

Mr. Chairman,
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy are, without a doubt, key issues in upholding the "grand
bargain" struck over fifty years ago by the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Building on and strengthening the work so far by many State parties to the Treaty is a joint
responsibility, as is facilitating accessto the benefits of the atom for development through the
nuclear applications in the fields of health, agriculture, clean water management and other that are
essential to sustainable development and must be one of the main outcomes of the current Review
process.
In this context, we must underline that the activities in the field of nuclear energy, nuclear medicine
and the nuclear technology applications in different modalities related to the atom, are only feasible
.

'

thanks to the existence of a legal framework that supports it, and the guarantee offered by the NPT
through the safeguards system managed by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In this regard, the Treaty is much closer to the every-day reality of people everywhere -and to the
solution to their problems~ that many would imagine.
It is not an overstatement to say that none of the activities that involve the use of radioactive sources
or the promotion of nuclear energy would be p9ssible or allowed, should the NPT not exist.
That is why the pillar of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, often overlooked by many in favor of other
more strategic or political issues in the Treaty, has on the other hand much more to do with the
wellbeing of our societies than the latter, and deserves utmost attention and priority.
In recent years, and in spite of the undeniable impact of ~he Fukushima-Daiichi accident, the
production of nuclear energy receives a renewed level of attention, linked to a new appreciation for
nuclear energy generation in the light of the urgent need for clean energy sources that do not
aggravate global warming nor add to the global carbon emissions.

Mr . Chairman,
This positive cycle for nuclear ene_rgy and applications was reinforced by the inclusion of energy
issues in the Sustainable Development Agenda 2030. The 2030 Agenda is a multilateral platform that

