
Mr. Chairman, 
Let me begin my statement by congratulating you and the two Vice-chairmen for the assumption of these high posts in our Conference. My delegation is convinced that under your leadership the work of this Committee will come to a good result. Let me at the same time assure you of the full support of the Austrian delegation in your difficult task. 

Introduction 
Mr. Chairman, 
Let me also mention at the outset of my presentation that my delegation fully aligns with the statement held by Ambassador Albuquerque, the head of the Portuguese delegation, and made on behalf of the European Union. 
Our statement therefore will focus only on items we think may provide additional thoughts for the discussion, which should be reflected in the outcome of this Conference. Let me in this context refer to proposals and draft language tabled by a group of countries including Austria, which, like in previous Review Conferences, have done so in an attempt to help put together thoughts which have been expressed either in previous conferences or in discussions with colleagues from member States. This is exactly the kind of in-put we hope can foster the work of our Committee. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The Non-proliferation Treaty is a well crafted legal instrument with different balances to provide for the security objectives of the Treaty and at the same time trying to even out as far as possible inequities in it. One describes the relationship between Art. III and Vl, where non-nuclear weapon States and nuclear weapon States sacrifice some of their sovereign rights, either by submitting their nuclear activities under international controls or by taking upon them obligations leading to the halt of nuclear arms race, giving up the development of nuclear weapons by banning Their testing, and finally disarmament, which means to reduce the existing arsenals with the ultimate goal of their elimination. This is certainly a long-term concept, but this should not hinder us to vigorously pursue this goal. 
The other direct line of balance - and that brings us to the theme of this Main Committee III - exists between Articles III and IV. NNWS submit their nuclear activities and materials under the verification system of the IAEA. As a balance for this self-imposed restriction of sovereignty NNWS shall have access to technical co-operation. 
Article IV of the NPT stipulates the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as long as such activities do not further any attempts towards the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
In this connection we should like to re-iterate what was agreed upon in the 1995 Conference, laid down in paragraphs 14 to 19 of the Principles and Objectives document, dealing with Article IV of the Treaty. 
Mr. Chairman, 
As is well known in this Conference my country has a very clear position vis à vis the utilization of nuclear power. The Austrian government holds the view that nuclear power does not contribute to sustainable development and therefore can not play a key role for future energy policies. 
This position, at the same time, must not be misunderstood in the context of Article IV, in particular because of the wide framework this article offers. 
We are of the opinion that the NPT contains a balance between Articles III and IV. As NNWS NPT members have firmly committed themselves not to acquire any capabilities in nuclear weapons and submitted all their peaceful nuclear activities under international verification by the IAEA, we have to understand the other half of the coin to be equally important, i.e. the readiness of member States to facilitate co-operation among States parties in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The NPT is directed towards providing a framework of confidence within which the exchange of information can take place. 

Co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
Mr. Chairman, 
Austria recognises that co-operation, i.p. the exchange of information constitutes one of the fundamental objectives of the Treaty. 
One principle that should loom highly in our considerations is to give preferential treatment in all our co-operation activities to those non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the Treaty, which have concluded and are implementing the required safeguards agreements with the IAEA. 
Furthermore we would like to underline the role of the IAEA in assisting developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy through the development of effective programmes aimed at improving their scientific, technological, and regulatory capabilities. We commend the IAEA Secretariat for its efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's technical co-operation programme and to ensure the continuing relevance of the programme to the changing circumstances and needs of recipient Member States. 
It is important that the IAEA's resources for technical co-operation activities be assured, predictable, and sufficient to meet objectives mandated in Article IV, paragraph 2 of the Treaty and Article II of the IAEA Statute, and Austria urges Member States to make every effort to pay in full and on time their contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund. 
Austria herself is participating in the IAEA's technical co-operation program, in the areas of non-power application and safety. 
As host country of the IAEA Austria has been participating actively in these programs in particular by providing training possibilities in such fields as radiation protection, nuclear medicine, in agriculture, basic physics and radiochemistry. In addition Austria has been making available a number of scientists, who lecture in training courses or give practical advice in scientific projects in developing countries. In this context let me add that Austria pledges regularly her share for the voluntary technical co-operation fund and provides early payment in full.
Transparency in Export Controls 
Mr. Chairman, 
Although we expect that the subject of export controls will be mainly dealt with in Main Committee Two in connection with safeguards, we touch upon them here as well, because there is clearly a relation also to the theme of "co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy." 
Export controls are a sovereign responsibility - not only a right, but also an obligation -of each NPT Member State, deriving from Art. III.2 of the Treaty. They are an essential element of the NPT, an important means to ensure that exports of sensitive materials, equipment and technologies are subject to IAEA safeguards and will be used only for peaceful purposes. The acceptance of export controls depends very much upon the setting up and maintaining of clear criteria, transparent enough to be understood and providing sufficient predictability in their performance. 
We hear again and again complaints from developing countries that there is too little will among industrialized countries Parties to the NPT to co-operate in technical assistance & co-operation programs, because of too stringent and unpredictable export policies. 
Although we do not share these complaints in detail, we still believe that we should listen to these concerns, and should take them seriously. Export controls should happen in an atmosphere of co-operation and dialogue. 
Transparency is very important in this regard. 
Therefore we commend the work done in this connection over the past five years. We commend the NSG for holding two seminars, in which not only representatives from the NSG countries explained their positions, but there was an important opportunity to learn from lecturers i.e. from "Non Aligned Movement" countries, what concerns they have. In addition, the Zangger Committee through its chairman could explain the particular aspects of this Committee, often referred to as the "NPT Exporters Committee". Let me in this connection also refer to the fact that the Zangger Committee has again submitted an information paper to this Conference, which is available as conference document NPT/Conf.2000/17.
Nuclear safety 
Mr. Chairman, 
What should define the scope of co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is the goal that all activities be performed in a manner devoted to security and safety. If these two main criteria are not met, co-operation is not feasible and not possible. 
My country's position on nuclear power has been referred to above. Nevertheless, we recognise the existence of a large number of nuclear power plants as well as other nuclear facilities in the range of the nuclear fuel cycle, such as research reactors, waste facilities etc. This is why my country attaches particular importance to all activities in the field of health and safety. 
Safety in all activities throughout the nuclear fuel cycle is a key element for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and continuous efforts are required to ensure that the technical and human requirements of safety are maintained at the optimal level. The Austrian delegation wants to emphasise the crucial importance of an adequate national technical, human, and regulatory infrastructure in nuclear safety, radiological protection, and waste management for the peaceful application of nuclear energy. Although safety is mainly a national responsibility, international co-operation on all safety-related matters is indispensable, not only because of the damaging effects nuclear activities can have on countries and populations in the vicinity of operating states. The Chernobyl accident has clearly given evidence that the term "vicinity" is to be interpreted rather widely. 
We strongly endorse the activities of the IAEA directed towards the strengthening of nuclear safety in operating power and research reactors. We also welcome the intensification of international co-operation in order to strengthen nuclear safety and radiological protection, mainly under the auspices of the IAEA. 
We welcome the First Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which took place in April last year in Vienna. It was very well organised by the IAEA Secretariat and brought together 45 countries. In our view, taking into account that it was the first meeting of its kind, it was a success. The conference demonstrated the high level of awareness which the question of nuclear safety has reached both nationally and internationally, and the merits of peer review and even peer pressure in order to accelerate safety improvements. We look forward to the next meeting and hope that it will provide improved reporting from member states, in particular in areas where the first Review Meeting found that there was room for safety improvements. 
We urge all States, particularly those operating, constructing, or planning nuclear power reactors, which have not yet taken the necessary steps, to become party to the Convention. We would also welcome a voluntary extension of the Convention to areas beyond operating power plants, such as research reactors. 
Safety of spent fuel and radioactive waste 
Mr. Chairman, 
We welcome the conclusion of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. We hope that this convention will soon enter into force and that the peer review foreseen in it will be facilitated by the experience we gained in the review process under the Convention on Nuclear Safety. We urge States that have not yet taken the necessary steps, to become party to the Convention. We would like to underline the importance of the standards established by the Joint Convention for civil activities to apply for military purposes as well. 
We commend the IAEA for its efforts in waste management, and, in view of the increasing importance of all aspects of nuclear waste management, call upon the Organisation to strengthen its efforts in this field. We endorse the IAEA programmes to assist Member States in this area in particular with safety standards, peer reviews, and other technical assistance activities.
Mr. Chairman, 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials 
Although the "physical protection of nuclear material" is, like export controls, a theme that should be mainly dealt with in Main Committee Two, we still believe that it also has an element in it that relates to Art. IV. My delegation is of the opinion that the application of proper physical protection standards by any recipient of nuclear material and other radioactive substances is a prerequisite for co-operation. Austria participates in the work that is currently going on in the IAEA on questions of whether and how to improve the existing convention that deals with the physical protection of nuclear material "while in international transit". We have been holding the view that the scope of this convention has been from the beginning too narrow and that we should widen the scope to also include binding requirements for the domestic use, storage and transport in member states. Taking the experience from other conventions, I referred to earlier in my statement, what we need is a convention that gives guidance to member states how to set up a proper national system for physical protection. Therefore Austria like other countries strongly advocates for a review and redrafting of the Convention to contain sufficient structure to meet these requirements. We are convinced that such a newly structured convention will be an incentive for more governments to adhere to it and use it as a legal basis for their domestic purposes. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The task of this Conference is to review the implementation of the Treaty, and to identify ways and means to further improve this implementation in the coming years. Both elements, backward and forward looking, are closely inter-linked. 
We therefore attach great importance to the work in this Committee and hope that our deliberations under your able guidance, Mr. Chairman, and with the support of the IAEA will lead to a successful result.
I thank you. 

