Check against delivery
Second Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
1 May 2013
Delegation of Austria
Cluster III
Statement by Ambassador Alexander Kmentt

Mr. Chairman,
The European Union has delivered statements, including on cluster III, and elaborated a
working paper, which the Austrian delegation fully supports. Let me also add a reference to
the traditional Working Papers of the Vienna Group of 10 on cooperation in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and on nuclear safety. In addition, Austria has offered a national report that
was issued as document PC.II/1.

The special position of Austria regarding nuclear power is well known in expert conferences
like this one. The inalienable right under Article IV to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT also
entails the option NOT to use nuclear power, and Austria has chosen this option.

As past accidents have shown, nuclear power can never be 100% safe. Furthermore, given the
long-term effects and responsibilities connected to the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear power does
not contribute to sustainable development. Indeed, it poses an additional risk in times of
natural or man-made crises. Given the combination of safety, security and proliferation
concerns, Austria holds the view that nuclear power is not a viable avenue to confront other
global challenges such as climate change.

Austria fully respects the rights of all states to peaceful uses of nuclear energy as enshrined in
the NPT. The IAEA is the major player to guarantee that countries choosing to develop their
capacities in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy do so under the best safety, security
and non-proliferation conditions. Even in times of economic and budgetary constraint, Austria
has made extra efforts to pay its assessed contributions to the IAEA regular budget and the
Technical Cooperation Fund in full and on time, thereby fulfilling its undertaking under
article IV paragraph 2 of the NPT.

Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is a comprehensive Treaty dealing with the three pillars on disarmament, nonproliferation and peaceful uses. All three pillars are interconnected. Against this background,
Austri has made efforts in accordance with its constitution to support and to diligently
implement the actions in the peaceful uses cluster, i.e. actions 47 to 64 of the action plan. I
would also like to recall the Austrian position regarding the full multilateralisation of the
complete nuclear fuel cycle, which remains the ideal to be pursued in order to universally
achieve the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.

Thank you Mr. Chairman.

