AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA
Australian Mission to the United Nations

E-mail australia@un.int

nd

150 East 42 Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.AustraliaUN.org

Third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Cluster III Statement by Mr Richard Mathews, Australian Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade
5 May 2014

Mr Chairman,
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) contributes fundamentally to international
peace and security. It also contributes materially to human development, by providing
the international framework that fosters international confidence and cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Australia supports States Parties having the right to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful uses within this framework.
We should not overlook how much the world has gained, and continues to gain, from the
practical applications of nuclear science and technology. Nor should we lose sight of the
importance of continuing to derive that benefit with the full assurance that nuclear
activities are being undertaken exclusively for peaceful purposes, and in line with the
highest international standards for safety and security.
Mr Chairman,
Today we see the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) working on programs to
improve food sustainability; to reduce disease and crop losses through the sterile insect
technique; to provide important analytical tools in the management and conservation of
existing supplies of water and in the identification of new, renewable sources of water;
and to apply nuclear techniques for medical purposes, including diagnosis and treatment
of cancer. We applaud that work and encourage all States to support the IAEA through
their contributions, including to the Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF), consistent with
Actions 52 to 55 of the 2010 NPT Review Conference outcome.
Australia works closely with the IAEA in support of its Technical Cooperation
Programme and makes other contributions, including to the Peaceful Uses Initiative.
Australia also shares its experience in the safe application of nuclear science and
technology with neighbouring countries through arrangements such as the Regional
Cooperative Agreement (RCA) for Research, Development and Training in Nuclear

-2Science and Technology for the Asia-Pacific region, and the Forum for Nuclear
Cooperation in Asia (FNCA).
Mr Chairman,
Australia exports uranium to fuel many of the world’s nuclear power reactors, and is a
party to numerous bilateral agreements. Through these agreements, Australia works to
ensure the widest application of IAEA safeguards and to promote the highest standards of
safety and nuclear security.
We encourage those States with research reactors using Highly Enriched Uranium fuel to
move to LEU fuel, in accordance with Action 61.
The Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, through its OPAL reactor
and processing facilities in Sydney, is a major contributor to the worldwide supply of
molybdenum-99 (the world’s major nuclear medicine), which exclusively uses lowenriched uranium (LEU) targets and fuel. In 2013 when world supplies were stretched
for a variety of reasons, Australia was able to export 42,000 patient doses per week to
Asia and North America, as well as meeting our own domestic demand. This
demonstrates that LEU technology is a viable pathway for the bulk production of
molybdenum-99 both now and in the future.
Mr Chairman,
Australia is also developing the use of nuclear techniques in material, environmental and
health research through a number of significant infrastructure investments, expanding
Australia’s capability in neutron scattering applications. This will greatly enhance
capacity in fields as diverse as treatment of cancer and other chronic illnesses, materials
research, climate change and environmental science, medical physics and nuclear
safeguards.
Australia is a strong supporter of the IAEA’s Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy
(PACT), including through the provision of experts for PACT missions to Pacific Island
countries. We look forward to continuing our close cooperation with the IAEA on the
cancer control programme.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear safety and security must remain a high priority for all States. Australia continues
to promote the implementation of best practices in nuclear safety and urges all States to
apply IAEA Safety Standards, to utilise IAEA peer review services on a regular basis and
publish mission reports, and to actively participate in peer review processes conducted
under the nuclear safety conventions.
Australia also supports the activities of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism, including by chairing the Nuclear Forensics Working Group and conducting
regional tabletop exercises in support of the GICNT work programme. At the Nuclear
Security Summit in The Hague in March 2014, Australia announced a contribution of $1
million dollars in support of the IAEA’s Nuclear Security Fund.

-3-

Mr Chairman,
As has often been noted, the three pillars of the NPT: non-proliferation, disarmament and
peaceful uses, are inextricably linked and mutually reinforcing. All States Parties to the
NPT have the right to conduct research into, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. However, that right is coupled with important obligations of nuclear
safeguards, security and safety that must be adhered to.
As we build to the 2015 Review Conference, Australia encourages all States to work
together to fully implement the 2010 NPT Action Plan. We commend working papers
from the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament Initiative (NPDI) and the Vienna Group of
Ten that deal with Cluster III issues. We hope the papers contribute to the debate and
help focus delegates’ minds on the importance of Cluster III issues to the health of the
NPT.

