
The NPT clearly recognizes the inalienable right to the development and use of nuclear energy for peaceful ends, which in fact predates the Treaty. This recognition of this inalienable right was a centra! part of the bargain that was struck at the creation of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. This bargain was at the core of the creation of the IAEA, and it was later to prove instrumental in establishing the NPT and in making it a permanent, quasi-universal regime.
The development and uses of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes is a fundamental principle of Brazil's national policy, which is enshrined in our Constitution. We remain convinced of the potential benefits of the responsible use of nuclear technologies and of the synergies fostered by international co-operation in the nuclear field, for which the work of the IAEA is of great importance.
Brazil has been a member of the IAEA since 1957. We participate in an active and constructive manner in the work of the Agency, with the aim of ensuring the right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology and to promote international cooperation in this field.
We receive significant benefits from international cooperation and also assist others by supplying them with technical cooperation in the field of nuclear science and peaceful nuclear technology applications.
Brazil shares the concern that peaceful nuclear programs may be used as cover for nuclear proliferation. However, some of the proposals that have been made to counter this concern, on the one hand, ignore the successful track record of the system of safeguards now in piace and, on the other, wrongfully blame the NPT for loopholes that supposedly detract from its effectiveness to combat nuclear non-proliferation.
Exceptional cases should not be invoked so as to justify any reinterpretation, or even review, of the provisions of article IV. This article makes no distinction between the different peaceful applications of nuclear energy.
Hence, we are of the view that this PrepCom should reaffirm the validity of Article IV with the view to ensure that the rights of all States Parties are fully protected and that no State Party is limited in the exercise of its rights to develop research, production and use of nuclear technologies for peaceful purposes.