I Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III

Brazil
Mr. Chairman,

Nuclear technology, in its multifarious applications, has become a
key motor of social and economic development of peoples around
the world. The NPT, building on the mandate of the IAEA,
recognizes, in its Article IV, the inalienable right of every State to
develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. In fact, this sovereign right predates and is independent
from the Treaty. What the NPT did was twofold: first, it asserted that
nothing in Treaty should affect the exercise of this right; and second,
it committed States Parties to facilitating and participating in the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and
technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Article IV also pointed to the imperative that, in such exchanges,
due consideration be given to the needs of non-nuclear weapon
States, especially those in the developing areas of the world.

Mr. Chairman,

Over the last 60 years, the IAEA has played a pivotal role in the
promotion of the peaceful applications of the atom. The uses of
nuclear

energy for

human

development

have

exponentially

expanded, ranging from health, medicine and the production of
radioisotopes, to the nuclear fuel cycle, power generation, industry,
agriculture and environmental protection.

In order to fulfil this core statutory function, the IAEA's activities, in
particular its Technical Cooperation Programme, should have
adequate support and sufficient, assured and predictable resources.

In recent years, nuclear technology’s role in fostering the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development has also gained recognition.
This also goes for the importance of the SDGs, and the activities
that the IAEA undertakes to help Member States to fulfil their
national objectives in this regard. Most noteworthy was the decision,
last year, by the IAEA Board of Governors, in its deliberations on the
budget update, to place appropriate emphasis to the Agency’s
activities directly related to the implementation of the SDGs in
Member States.

A concrete example to that effect is the ongoing Renovation of the
Nuclear Applications Laboratories of the Agency -- the ReNuAL and
ReNuAL-plus projects. Challenges faced both by developing and
developed countries underpin the relevance of these projects, which
include, inter alia, the construction of a new Insect Pest Control
Laboratory (IPCL). The public health emergencies that took place in

the recent past, such as the Zika virus outbreak, only reinforced the
public perception about the important contribution of nuclear
techniques.

Mr. Chairman,

Brazil pursues a national programme that encompasses several
areas, including the full nuclear fuel cycle, and continues to promote
international cooperation with several partners, including through the
IAEA.

We proceed with our collaboration with Argentina on the
construction of a Multipurpose Research Reactor, which will ensure
Brazil’s self-sufficiency in the production of radioisotopes for human
health, industry and agriculture, and will also bring about progress in
other nuclear applications, such as research and materials testing.

Brazil is a staunch supporter of the Agreement for the Promotion of
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and the
Caribbean (ARCAL), which has been bringing benefits to the region
for over thirty years. The Regional Strategic Profile of ARCAL for
2016-2021 is enabling more efficient and targeted implementation of
several projects that have been agreed upon under its framework.

Mr. Chairman,

Besides developing and implementing robust and effective national
legislation, Brazil participates actively in different international
initiatives to strengthen nuclear safety and security, including the
Nuclear Security Summits and two IAEA Ministerial Conferences,
the latest of which in December 2016.

Brazil is guided by the belief that international measures to
strengthen nuclear safety and security, as well as export controls of
sensitive technologies, must not hamper international cooperation in
the field of peaceful nuclear activities.

It is atomic bombs and the associated materials that pose the
greatest risk to humanity. And not civilian nuclear facilities or
activities under IAEA full-scope safeguards.

Today, as we all know, the vast majority of sensitive nuclear
materials continue to be exempt from any multilateral verification or
oversight mechanisms. Most of the high enriched uranium and
separated plutonium is in the hands of a few nuclear-armed States.

Brazil and other like-minded States champion a comprehensive
approach in the area of nuclear security. We are convinced that, to
be consistent and ultimately effective, nuclear security must be
articulated within the international community’s broader efforts to
promote the inter-related goals of nuclear disarmament, nonproliferation and the advancement of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.

To conclude, Mr. Chairman, as we look towards the 2020 Review
Conference, it is Brazil’s firm conviction that non-proliferation and
other security concerns must not hinder the exercise of the right to
peaceful nuclear uses in myriad activities for social and economic
development.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

