Mr Chairman,
At a time when the issues related to non-compliance with non-proliferation obligations have been brought to the fore of the international debate, let us not brush aside what was originally agreed by all Parties to the KPT and subsequently reaffirmed at every Review Conference: that "nothing in the Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all Parlies to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, II and III". By providing a framework of confidence and cooperation within which the development of the peaceful uses of the ato m can take place, the Treaty aims at fostering such development.
The adoption of increased curbs and restrictions on nuclear research and on the development of the peaceful nuclear industry in non-nuclear-weapon States, which require greater intrusiveness, beyond the mandatory and the voluntary system of control already in place , has been advocated with increasing vehemence. In view of the urgency attached to them by their proponents, there is the risk that such newr restrictions be decided and enforced by small clubs of "like-minded nations" or even unilaterally by the more powerful among them. My delegation believes that it is important to differentiate between members in good standing of the existing control mechanisms and would-be proliferators, and to respect the legitimate scientific and/or commercial interests of developing nations. The monopoly on weapons must not become a monopoly on technology.
Mr Chairman,
The strength, credibility and permanence of the NPT rests on a fundamental bargain which must be recognized and upheld if we want the Treaty to be effective and lasting by virtue of its own merits rather than let it be used to serve selective interests through the perpetuation of discrimination and imbalance.
The development of nuclear energy is an essential element for States to supply their own energy needs. The right of developing States to pursue their energy needs should not in a:iy way be jeopardized. The lawful exercise of the rights granted under Article IV must not be considered by itself an indication of intention of non-compliance.
We have witnessed how the need to secure energy supplies has been a core concern throughout the XXth Century. Wrhat are the perspectives for energy supplies in the XXIst Century? Nuclear energy - particularly as new, safer, proliferation-resistant reactors are developed - will have a prominent role in the energy profile of the world. Developing countries should not be shut out of the perspectives of energy security.
The development of nuclear weapons has never been an accidental by-product of peaceful pursuits. It has always involved political decisions, related to security and power perceptions, and has always derived from specific efforts thereto.
I would stress that further restrictions and controls over legitimate peaceful nuclear programs which might be deemed necessary in the light of the current realities must be matched by both the reinforcement of the obligation to achieve nuclear disarmament and by concrete, irreversible and verifiable action in that direction, based on the consensual 13 steps of 2000. The uncovering of a couple of real or suspected cheaters should not become a pretext to curtail bona fide, lawful programs of scientific or commercial interest in developing countries, opening the way to the confiscation of sensitive technologies making them the exclusive property of a few.
We are ready to examine ways and means to make non-compliance with Article II less rewarding and more onerous, particularly to minimize the negative proliferation impact of noncompliance, in conjunction with Article XII of the IAEA Statute.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.