Cluster 3:
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy:
Nuclear energy and technology are indispensable for the advancement of
humankind. They provide needed leverage for raising human welfare, which
makes them particularly important for developing countries in their efforts to
achieve the sustainable development goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
Article IV of the NPT recognizes the inalienable right of every State to the
peaceful uses and development of nuclear energy. This is a right for humanity,
that predates and legally supersedes the NPT itself, and must remain
protected and enforced accordingly, without conditions, qualifications or
strings attached.
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy can uniquely contribute to medicine, public
health, agriculture, food security, water resources management, sustainable
energy and the environment, to name only but a few areas. Cooperation in
peaceful uses requires resources, sharing of knowledge, know-how,
technology, information and best practices.
This is an area that can gain greater momentum and relevance through
multilateral international cooperation, including with the concurrence of the
IAEA. It is also an area of cooperation and national policy-making reliant on
unimpeded access to nuclear goods and technology for peaceful purposes.
Enhancing the peaceful uses pillar of the NPT as well as international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology in general
is an objective Brazil would support as an important outcome of the 2020
RevCon.
To be meaningful, such an understanding would require increased
commitment from the States Parties at the forefront of nuclear technology
development to sharing their knowledge and expertise with less endowed
developing countries parties to the NPT.

[WP on Framework for Peaceful Cooperation (France):]

The inalienable right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology,
recognized under Article IV, is unconditional. It cannot be weakened or
qualified within the treaty and less so by elements extraneous to the NPT. This
would be tantamount to a breach of the treaty and would undermine the NPT
edifice.
Therefore, we note with caution proposals such as the one put forward by
France on a “framework for peaceful cooperation”. Initiatives on the peaceful
uses pillar must not directly or indirectly place further restrictions on the
enjoyment Article IV by NNWS of the NPT.
Regarding transfers of nuclear material, a robust regulation is already in place,
including in the context of the NSG, which is sufficient and effective. On the
issue of safeguards, we reiterate that the Additional Protocol is a voluntary
instrument, as recognized by both the NPT and the IAEA. Brazil also considers
that the term “fallback safeguards”, which is foreign to the IAEA glossary, is
dubious in meaning and introduces an unwarranted element of uncertainty
about the objectives of the proposed “framework” and its alignment with the
NPT.

Nuclear Safety and Security:

In recent years, the international community has been engaging in different
initiatives in the areas of nuclear safety and security, within the IAEA and in
other frameworks.
Brazil participates actively and constructively in related IAEA Conferences and
in the Nuclear Security Summits, and it develops and implements robust,
effective and adequate legislation in these areas.
Brazil is fully committed to the safe and secure use of nuclear technology for
the benefit of humanity. The strengthening of international commitments in
these areas must serve the purpose of providing a stable environment which
facilitates the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, by preventing

risks and threats that may result from the inappropriate or non-authorized use
of nuclear energy.
We must not forget that it is not safeguarded civilian nuclear facilities or
activities, but atomic bombs that pose the greatest risk to humanity.
Incoherently, all stockpiles of nuclear material for military uses remain
completely outside the scope of multilateral verification and control
mechanisms. We understand that it is impossible to dissociate the quest for
nuclear security, as is also the case for nuclear nonproliferation, from the
effective implementation of disarmament commitments established in the
NPT.
Brazil considers that accepting a clear prohibition of nuclear weapons under
the TPNW, and working towards its strengthening and implementation, is the
new standard for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, including in
respect of nuclear safety and security.
Thank you.

