BRAZIL
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Third session

Cluster 3

New York, 5 May 2014

Statement by

H.E. Ambassador Pedro Motta Pinto Coelho
Permanent Representative of Brazil
to the Conference on Disarmament

(check against delivery)

Mr. Chairman,
Article IV of the NPT expressly recognizes “the inalienable right of all the Parties to the
Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes”.
It also determines that States in a position to do so shall cooperate in the “development of
the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of
non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration for the needs of
the developing areas of the world.”
The IAEA’s statement on the General Debate last week underlined the great contributions
that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy make to humankind, in areas such as medicine,
public health, agriculture, food security, water resources management, sustainable energy
and the environment. In this context, it is essential that all States be allowed to have
access and make use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It is also key that the
IAEA’s technical cooperation branch be awarded the adequate support and resources it
requires. We welcome the fact that the Agency has decided to take an active part in
discussions on the post-2015 development agenda, including by providing inputs to the
process of preparing for the next Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Chairman,
In recent years, the international community has been engaging in different initiatives,
both within the IAEA and in other frameworks, in the areas of nuclear safety and
security. Brazil has actively participated in the IAEA Conferences and in the Nuclear
Security Summits, and it develops and implements robust, effective and adequate
legislation in these areas.
Brazil is fully committed to the safe and secure use of nuclear technology, as that is the
only way that humanity can fully benefit from it. The strengthening of international
commitments in these areas must serve the purpose of providing a stable environment
which facilitates the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, by preventing
risks and threats that may result from the inappropriate or non-authorized use of nuclear
energy.
It is our view, however, that legitimate concerns with nuclear security and safety cannot
be used as pretext for the imposition of constraints on the inalienable right of States to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We must not forget, Mr. Chairman, that it is not civilian nuclear facilities or activities,
but atomic bombs that pose the greatest risk to humanity. Today, as we know, all
stockpiles of nuclear material for military use are exempt of multilateral control
mechanisms. As a matter of fact, according to United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research (UNIDIR) and the International Panel on Fissile Materials (IPFM), 98% of the
highly enriched uranium and 86% of the separated plutonium stockpiles worldwide are
possessed by the nuclear weapon states.

2

These concerns have led Brazil to submit, along with fourteen other countries with a
similar view, the Joint Statement to this year’s Nuclear Security Summit statement titled
"In larger security: a comprehensive approach to nuclear security.” We understand that it
is impossible to dissociate the quest for nuclear security, as is also the case for nuclear
non-proliferation, from the effective implementation of disarmament commitments
established in the Treaty of Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. A world that accepts
nuclear weapons will always be insecure. It is essential to eliminate such weapons,
which, because of the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of their use, remain a
permanent threat to humanity.
Mr. Chairman,
Brazil strongly believes that nuclear technology is an indispensable component of social,
economic, and technological development of peoples around the world, in particular of
those living in developing countries. This is, as already mentioned, the very rationale of
Article IV of the NPT, which recognized the inalienable right of every State to the
peaceful uses and development of nuclear energy. For the benefit of humankind, this
right, which predates the NPT, must remain accordingly protected and enforced.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

