Main Committee III
Thank you, Madame Chairman. Let me congratulate you on your election to preside over this important Committee and assure you of my delegation's full support for your efforts to achieve a result in Main Committee III which contributes to the overall success of this Review Conference. My intervention today will address all major issues covered by this Committee, including Peaceful Uses, the relationship between rights and obligations under the Treaty, new approaches to the Nuclear Fuel Cycle, the CTBT, and the Treaty's Withdrawal provisions.
Peaceful! Uses
The right to the Peaceful Uses of nuclear energy is aptly described as one of the three pillars of the NPT. Canada prizes this right and enjoys its manifold benefits. Sixteen percent of Canada's electrical power ~ the same proportion as worldwide - derives from nuclear generation, and in the largest and most industrial province, the nuclear sector provides nearly half the power consumed. Canada's indigenous reactor design, the CANDU, has pioneered unique features to heighten efficiency and to minimize the risk of proliferation. We believe that nuclear power has and will continue to have an important place in a well-balanced energy mix, and with the future of nuclear power in mind, Canada is one of the few countries participating in both the INPRO and Gen IV initiatives. The large Canadian nuclear industry, including non- power applications, is a key contributor to our national prosperity and well-being. I t is unsurprising that Canada is deeply attached to Article IV rights, and is staunch in their defence.
Aware of the benefits of nuclear energy and related applications, Canada believes these technologies must serve humanity. Nuclear power can be part of a judicious response to the challenges of climate change by meeting growing energy demand with minimal greenhouse gas emissions. Nuclear energy can also contribute to sustainable development in fields as diverse as agriculture, water resource management, and human health. Canada is the world's leading exporter of both uranium for nuclear fuel and medical radioisotopes. We recognize the recent renewal of interest worldwide in the nuclear option, and the potential renaissance of the nuclear industry. Given the statutory role of the IAEA in encouraging the peaceful uses of nuclear technology in developing countries, Canada strongly supports the Agency's Technical Cooperation programme, and for several years has met or exceeded the rate of attainment for voluntary contributions to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund. Canada welcomes the establishment of the IAEA's Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT).
Bilaterally, Canada exchanges nuclear technology with countries in every region, and has in place Nuclear Cooperation Agreements with some 38 partners, both developed and developing, all of whom have willingly accepted Canada's stringent nuclear non-proliferation standards. I would hasten to point out that these bilateral
agreements are fully reciprocal. Canada accepts the same nuclear non-proliferation obligations that we ask of others - no more, no less.
Rights and obligations
Confidence that a State will live up to its nuclear non-proliferation commitments creates the necessary climate under which nuclear cooperation can flourish, and effective verification is an essential element in that confidence. Adherence to a comprehensive safeguards agreement and an Additional Protocol, which together represent the contemporary verification standard and which should be recognized as such by this Review Conference, along with a consistent record of compliance with both instruments, is a prerequisite for international confidence. It is noteworthy that the Treaty commits States Party to the fullest "possible" exchange of nuclear expertise, as the drafters clearly recognized that there may be limits to such exchanges. Individual export decisions fall within the sovereignty of States Party, and no State can be compelled to engage in a specific exchange of nuclear or nuclear-related dual-use material, equipment and technology where it lacks the necessary confidence that such an exchange will not contribute to proliferation.
The Treaty confers a set of interrelated and mutually-reinforcing rights and obligations on States Party. The inalienable right to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, enshrined in Article IV, is balanced by obligations, for that right must be exercised in conformity with Articles 1,11 and 111. Although Article IV does not contain a specific reference to Article 111, the relationship is clearly inherent, given the role of Article 111 is confirming a state's respect for its Article II obligations. The relationship between the rights to peaceful uses and the non-proliferation obligations of the Treaty means that the right to peaceful uses may be inalienable, but is not unconditional or absolute. It follows that a State Party which does not continuously comply with its Treaty obligations cannot invoke that right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Such a State has isolated itself, through its own actions, from the benefits of international cooperation, at least until it comes into full compliance, and regains international confidence. This nexus of rights and obligations predates the Treaty, as the IAEA Statute provides for the termination of technical assistance in cases of safeguards non-compliance. States Party should limit their nuclear cooperation to fellow States Party in compliance with their NPT obligations. Such an approach should also be endorsed by this Review Conference.
Nuclear Fuel Cycle
There has been long-standing apprehension that sensitive aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle, namely enrichment and reprocessing, might be misused for weapons purposes. Renewed concerns about such misuse have given rise to, or revived, a debate on new collaborative approaches to the fuel cycle which would obviate a state's
need for the full nuclear fuel cycle while meeting its essential peaceful use needs. Most NPT States Party, including those with large nuclear industries such as Canada, have hitherto judged a domestic enrichment and reprocessing capacity to be unnecessary. It is instructive to recall that while 23 non-nuclear weapon States Party operate power reactors, and over 50 have research reactors, only four have a commercial enrichment capacity, and only one engages in reprocessing.
In an increasingly inter-dependent world, few states can claim energy self- sufficiency. Such inter-dependence should not, however, be regarded as a weakness, but rather a testimony to the strength of the global economy. Canada welcomes current work to develop innovative approaches to the fuel cycle which could reduce the incentive for States to acquire a production capacity for to weapon-useable material, while at the same time ensuring access by States Party to nuclear energy for peaceful purposes at reasonable market prices. To be viable, such approaches must be consensual and non-discriminatory, providing States a reliable alternative to domestic enrichment and reprocessing. Except in instances of non-compliance, States Party must not be asked to abdicate any of their rights, but rather be encouraged to seek out cooperative arrangements which will provide the same opportunity to enjoy the fruits of nuclear energy without necessitating the full exercise of such rights.
CTBT
The last Review Conference determined that the provisions of Article V of the Treaty should be interpreted in light of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. But the CTBT's relevance for the NPT goes far beyond its invalidating the concept of a peaceful nuclear explosion. The CTBT has an organic link to the NPT, and was a condition of the NPT's indefinite extension. I t furthers key objectives of the NPT, constraining both vertical and horizontal proliferation and diminishing the political value of nuclear weapons. The CTBT's entry into force was identified in 2000 as the first of the 13 practical steps to achieve disarmament. It is therefore a matter of deep regret to my delegation that seven States Party to the NPT, each of whose CTBT ratification is necessary for that treaty to enter into force, still have not done so. It is also a matter of regret that the Executive Secretary of the CTBTO, Dr Wolfgang Hoffmann, has not been invited to address the Review Conference.
While not yet as universally accepted as the NPT, the Test-ban Treaty, with 175 signatories and 121 ratifiers, is increasingly widely subscribed, and embodies a universal norm against nuclear testing. With each additional signature or ratification, the normative value of the CTBT increases, even prior to entry into force. With every day in which the current moratorium on nuclear tests is respected, the test-ban become more entrenched in practice. Meanwhile, the monitoring system - unprecedented for its accuracy and global reach - must continue to be developed and permitted to demonstrate its capabilities. But moratoria and norms of behaviour are no substitute for a legal binding, verifiable instrument, and the Review Conference should call upon all
States which have not yet done so, and particular!/ on those remaining States listed in Annex 2, to ratify the CTBT without delay, in furtherance of their NPT obligations.
Withdrawal
My delegation will address the specific case of the DPRK's withdrawal from the Treaty, along with the DPRK's previous non-compliance and their implications for international peace and security, in the subsidiary body on Regional Issues. But the DPRK's withdrawal, the first and let us hope the last, by any State Party to this Treaty, has occasioned reflection on the meaning and application of Article X, and the need for the Review Conference to consider the Treaty's withdrawal provisions.
Withdrawal from the Treaty is a sovereign right of any State Party, providing it fulfills the provisions of Article X. The Treaty is a covenant with the world community, freely and solemnly entered into, from which a State may withdraw only in extremis, when "extraordinary events" relating to the subject matter of the Treaty have jeopardized its supreme interests. A decision to withdraw is not one to be taken lightly, or without due regard to its implications and consequences, including those for national and global security.
A State which opts out of the Treaty is also opting out of the political and economic benefits stemming from the Treaty. An NPT apostate can no longer expect to be covered by the Negative Security Assurances offered to non-nuclear weapon States Party. Nor can it expect to retain, and perhaps misuse, those nuclear capabilities it acquired while a Party to the Treaty. Nuclear cooperation extended to States Party should be denied to any country which renounces tie NPT, and appropriate action taken with regard to nuclear items and infrastructure provided to it as a State Party or derived from such cooperation. At the very least, supplying states should require perpetual safeguards on any material or equipment provided in good faith to a fellow State Party. The Review Conference should adopt such provisions. NPT membership must not be a ruse under which guise a State cultivates advanced nuclear capacities and then perverts them to weapons purposes.
Moreover, withdrawal is not an avenue for evading the consequences of non-compliance, and a State which chooses to withdraw cannot gain immunity from being held accountable for its actions while Party to the Treaty, but should expect, on the contrary, to be subject to additional scrutiny of its past conduct. States Party have a responsibility to be in compliance with their Treaty obligations up till the point that they have legally withdrawn.
Article X requires that a withdrawing State notify all other Parties, as well as the UN Security Council, of its intentions. As the multilateral organ charged with upholding international peace and security, the Council must act when such an extraordinary occurrence take place. Article X also requires that a withdrawing State provide an explanation for its decision, and stipulates that three months shall elapse
between the notification and the withdrawal taking effect. This three month period provides a brief but critical opportunity during which diplomatic efforts to dissuade withdrawal, or if appropriate to redress those caus.es cited as reasons for withdrawal, can be pursued. How much more effective might such efforts be if the Treaty regime had a rapid-reaction capacity, through which States Party could hold an extraordinary meeting to consider and respond to a notification of withdrawal. My delegation has elaborated elsewhere ideas for strengthening the Treaty regime's institutional responsiveness in the face of such threats to its integrity.
Let me conclude on this topic, Madame Chairman, by asserting that a State which has given notice of withdrawal ought not to remain long in limbo, as prolonged uncertainty over its status undermines the Treaty and complicates the adjustment of relations between States Party and :he withdrawing State, which must be recalibrated as a function of its status vis-a-vis the NPT. A State is either Party to this Treaty, or it is not. We cannot afford to leave the impression that the NPT allows for some "grey zone" of adherence.

