Mr. Chairman.
We are pleased to welcome you as Chair of Main Committee III, and wish to assure you of Canada's full support as we begin our deliberations. We look forward to engaging with you and our colleagues in constructive and cooperative efforts to address the many Important issues before this Committee.
A major strength of the NPT is that it enables further development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy by increasing stability and predictability. Canada is fully supportive of realizing the greatest possible benefits of nuclear energy for NPT states that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. With over sixty years of experience in this field, we believe nuclear energy holds significant promise for the future in terms of addressing socio-economic development and energy needs and mitigating the threat of climate change. In this regard we support the expanded use of nuclear energy and the continued innovation and improvement of nuclear technologies, along with the further strengthening of existing frameworks to ensure nuclear energy's growth is secure, safe and does not contribute to proliferation.
Canada has a strong nuclear industry and we are advocates of responsible and mutually beneficial nuclear cooperation. We currently have 27 Nuclear Cooperation Agreements covering 44 countries and we are actively working to engage in nuclear cooperation with additional partners who meet our non-proliferation requirements. All our Agreements are reciprocal and we abide by the same requirements that we expect of our partners.
Sustaining confidence in the Treaty requires that we ensure that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear technology in no way contribute to proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this context, it is our view that this Committee should recommend that the Review Conference take concrete action to ensure that the balance of rights and responsibilities enshrined in the Treaty is protected and made practically implementable.
It is important to recognize that full implementation of IAEA safeguards makes a vital contribution to establishing an environment of confidence for the development of an international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This Committee should recommend that the Review Conference stress that compliance with the non- proliferation and verification requirements of the Treaty is the essential basis for peaceful nuclear cooperation.
This Committee should also recommend that the Review Conference reiterate the essential role of the IAEA in assisting developing States Party in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, under the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions, through the development of effective programs aimed at improving their scientific, technological and regulatory capabilities. The Conference should recommend that the IAEA continue, through its Technical Cooperation Programme, to take into account the socio-economic needs of developing countries, including least developed countries, when planning its
future activities, Canada also strongly believes that further strengthening of the Technical Cooperation Programme should be encouraged to make it more transparent, accountable and results-oriented. In our capacity as current G8 President, we note that Canada and other G8 members stand ready to consider requests for necessary technical assistance for capacity-building to fulfill safeguards, safety and security requirements.
As you know, G8 Foreign Ministers recently expressed their support for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, science and technology that can benefit all. They undertook to cooperate with countries which intend to develop such programs, particularly in the areas of power generation, healthcare and food security and to help them to meet essential requirements regarding safety, security, non-proliferation and protection of the environment for future generations.
Canada also strongly supports the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) efforts to broaden sustainable access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This includes, inter alia, assisting IAEA member states progress along the "Milestones in the Development of a National Infrastructure for Nuclear Power". Canadian experts have been contributing to all IAEA Major Programmes since the Agency's inception, and they continue to assist in the dissemination of nuclear knowledge and experience to other member states. Agency safety and security standards, nuclear energy guidance documents, and peer-review assessments have benefitted from Canada's history of providing cost-free expertise of its scientists, engineers and regulators.
Ensuring long-term access to nuclear power also includes the development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, such as assurances of fuel supply and fuel services. In this regard, we welcome the decision in November 2009 by the IAEA Board of Governors on the establishment in Russia of a reserve of low enriched uranium for its Member States, as well as other proposals for the assured supply of nuclear fuel. The Conference should examine the role that reliable and transparent fuel assurance mechanisms can play in providing an effective back-up to the existing market. By offering additional confidence of supply beyond that provided by the market, international fuel banks have the potential to facilitate access to civil nuclear power by eliminating the need for states to invest in costly and complex fuel cycle technologies. This conference could make a significant contribution by acknowledging the value that multilateral fuel supply assurance mechanisms can play in support of the development of nuclear energy, and by establishing basic parameters for such mechanisms.
Finally, as noted by G8 Foreign Ministers last month, the Review Conference presents States Party with a timely opportunity to reaffirm the international resolve on how to address possible abuses of the withdrawal provision. Several countries from a variety of regions have recently produced working papers on this subject to guide our deliberations, and we will consider them closely. Canada views a notification of intent to withdraw from the NPT as a situation that could potentially threaten the integrity and viability of the treaty, and which therefore merits a commensurate response. At present NPT States Parties lack a provision to meet collectively in a timely fashion to discuss
such a critical issue as withdrawal or a nuclear test. For this reason, 17 countries along with Canada have proposed language in Working Paper Four that makes provision for an Extraordinary Meeting of States Parties, and I commend this paper to your attention.
In addition, I would also like to draw your attention to Working Papers 15 to 21 put forward by the Vienna Group of 10 Group which are co-sponsored by Canada. These papers outline in detail a range of specific recommendations related to peaceful uses, export controls, physical protection and other relevant issues to the work of this Committee.
We welcome the views of others on the ideas put forward and look forward to constructive discussion on how to address these important issues as the work of this Committee proceeds in the coming days.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



