Statement by the Chinese Delegation
on Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
at the Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Geneva, April 30 t h, 2013

Mr. Chairman,
Last year has witnessed steady revival of nuclear energy worldwide.
As proven, clean and competitive source of energy, nuclear power
remains the first option of energy development for many countries. The
vigorous development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes represents
the general trend of the times. The international community should take
this opportunity to promote development of nuclear energy t6 better
benefit the manldnd.
China believes that development of nuclear energy is of great
significance for ensuring global energy safety and addressing climate
change. Peace, development and cooperation are still the main themes of
the world and many developing countries are entering fast track of
development. At the same time, the energy challenges are still prominent,
including tight supply of fossil energy, difficulties in large-scale
increasing pressure from
development of renewable energy,
environmental protection. The world has been overwhelmed by such
challenges. Nuclear energy should be treated in a rational way. Instead of
giving up eating for fear of choking, we should promote development of
nuclear energy in a way that will contribute to peace and development of
the world.
To promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the important
goals of the NPT and represents the inalienable right of all States Parities
under the Treaty. The right of States Parties to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy should be f·ully respected. While utilizing nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, effective measures should also be taken to prevent
nuclear proliferation. Peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons are complementary to each other.
Sustainable development of nuclear energy cannot be achieved only on a .
single pillar.

Facilitating international cooperation is the best means of ensuring
in-depth development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The current
exchanges and interdependence among countries are unprecedented. The
globalization of the development of l1llClear energy and nuclear
technologies is prominent. The regional and even global implications of
relevant nuclear issues cannot. be ignored. Only through joint efforts by
all countries can the smooth development of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes be ensured.
Nuclear safety and security are the lifelines of sustainable
development nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It is an arduous task
to effectively manage both nuclear safety and security. It is necessary to
continue to promote nuclear safety standards and norms, share advanced
experiences and best practices on nuclear safety, and advance the level
of nuclear safety technologies. All states should earnestly undertake their
international responsibilities on nuclear security, and promote the
universality of relevant international legal instruments, so as to
guarantee the safety ofthe environment and the society.
Mr. Chairman,
In accordance with its duty specified in the Statute, in 2012, the
IAEA worked actively in promoting the coordinated and sustainable
development of nuclear energy and nuclear technology, especially in the
field of nuclear safety and nuclear security. The Agency's teclmical
cooperation projects were well implemented and positive progress was
achieved in areas such as food, agriculture and cancer treatment. The
Fukushima Mil1isterial Conference on Nuclear Safety was convened: A
ministerial conference on nuclear security will also be held this year.
China appreciates the efforts by the Agency in promoting peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and supports the positive role it plays in the field of
l1uclear security and safety. We also call upon states parties, especially
developed countries, to provide more technical assistance to developing'
. countries, so as to benefit more people.
Mr. Chairman,
China pursues development strategy of actively promoting energy
conservation and optimizing the energy structure. In October 2,012, the
2

State Council of China adopted the Medium and Long-term Nuclear
Power Development Program (20 11~2020), which provided latest plan
for nuclear power development in China for the current and future
periods, and restarted the review and approval process for new projects
of nuclear power wlits. Nuclear power remains an important part of
China's energy development strategy. China will unswervingly promote
.nuclear power development in an efficient and sustainable manner on the
premise of ensuring safety. So far, there are 16 operating nuclear power
units with a total installed capacity of 13.61 GWe in the mainland. All
units have kept a good record and major operational performances reach
the advanced international standards. With the world largest nuclear
power fleet under construction, China has 29 units under construction
with atotal installed capacity of 31.64GWe.
International cooperation plays an important role III the
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in China. China has
concluded 27 inter-governmental cooperation agreements on peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In line with the principle of equality and mutual
benefit, we have carried out extensive exchanges and cooperation,
including exchange visits, import of equipment and technology,
ecolfomic and trade exchanges. Meanwhile, China puts great emphasis
on the nuclear security and safety and fulfills its promises made in the
Nuclear Security Summits. The Nuclear Power Safety Program
(2011~2020) clearly provides that China.will build new nuclear units in
accordance with the highest nuclear safety standards. The construction
plan for the nuclear security center of excellence has been approved by
the State Council with a gross investment of about 500 million RMB. The
project on conversion of miniature neutron source reactor [llel from
. highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium is running well and
initial results are expected. China has contributed an accumulative total of
600, 000 US dollars to the Agency's nuclear security fund to suppOli the
capacity-building in the Asia-pacific region in this regard.
Promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy is required by the
growing global energy needs and wide application of nuclear teclmology.
All states should make joint efforts to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation mutually reinforced and
3
"-, .

coordinately developed, and to create a new prospect for safe, efficient
and sustainable development of the nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,

The Chinese Delegation has submitted a working paper (WP.31) on
peaceful uses of nuclear energy which elaborates China's relevant
positions. We hope the elements contained therein will be reflected in the
report of this PrepCom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

4

