Check Against Delivery

Statement of Chinese Delegation at the First Session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
On Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy
Mr. Chairman,
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy are one of the three mainstays of NPT, and inalienable
rights assigned by the treaty to all countries. Peaceful uses of nuclear energy is
favorable to the world’s peace, health and prosperity, and will facilitate the
comprehensive achievement of all targets of NPT, and advance the progress of nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
The efforts to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons shall not impair the legitimate
rights for peaceful uses of nuclear energy of all countries, especially the developing
countries, Meanwhile, measures shall be actively taken to prevent proliferation of
nuclear weapons. The two mainstays complement each other, and emphasis on either
one shall go against the sustainable development of nuclear power.
Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and relevant international
cooperation is one of the important goals of NPT and the Statute of IAEA. The IAEA
has played a central role in this regard and has provided extensive assistance to its
member states through technical cooperation and other assistance modes, and won full
recognition from its member states. China appreciates the efforts made by the IAEA.
The IAEA’s promotional activities and technical cooperation activities for peaceful
uses of nuclear energy shall be ensured by commensurate resources. All IAEA
member states shall make full and timely payment to the Technical Cooperation Fund.
We call for all member states, especially the developed countries, to consider the
practical demand of the developing countries and to continuously strengthen the
assistance to the developing countries on peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
China has always been making contributions to the international cooperation of
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The International Construction Training Center on
nuclear power, which was set up by China and the Agency, has provided training
services for nearly 200 trainees from 36 countries since 2012 in nuclear power
infrastructure construction. China positively supports the Agency's nuclear application
laboratory renovation project, in addition to the donation of a new radiation system
worth 2.5 million dollars, China donated 2 million euros for laboratory infrastructure.
In 2016, China hosted a series of international conferences, including the the 20th
Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference and the 9th International Youth Nuclear Energy
Congress, providing cooperation platforms for colleagues in the nuclear field.
1

Mr. Chairman,
At present, the world pattern is undergoing profound changes. Global governance
system is at a turning point in history, the world is facing economic growth slowdown,
continued weak energy demand, severe anti-terrorism and security situation,
environmental pollution, climate change and other risks and challenges.
China attaches great importance to the issue of sustainable development and climate
change, and takes the development of nuclear energy as an important measure to
promote energy conservation and pollution prevention, to stabilize economic growth,
to optimize the energy structure and to achieve green and sustainable development. At
present, mainland China has 36 nuclear power units in operation, 20 nuclear power
units under construction, which ranks first in the world. According to China's the
adjusted Medium- and Long-term Nuclear Power Development Program, the total
installed capacity of operational nuclear power plants will reach 58 GWe and another
30 GWe under construction by 2020. While accelerating the construction of nuclear
power, we pay great attention to innovation and development of nuclear energy as
well. -The “Hualong One” nuclear power plant that adopts the 3rd generation of
nuclear power technology independently designed by China, is under construction
both in domestic and foreign country, showing the safety and economy of its
technology has been recognized. Large advanced pressurized water reactor CAP1400
and small module reactor ACP100 have gone through the Generic Reactor Safety
Review by the IAEA, and have met the conditions for engineering construction.
China issued the "13th Five-Year Nuclear Industrial Development Plan" this February,
and will launch a number of major projects in the next five years which will further
promote the application of nuclear technology and the comprehensive development of
nuclear industry.
China's nuclear science and technology are widely used in food irradiation, radiation
chemical industry, industrial inspection and other fields and has accumulated a lot of
experience. In order to promote the achievement of 2030 sustainable development
goals, China is willing to use existing resources to provide assistance to the IAEA to
support developing countries to obtain low-carbon, clean energy technology,
including nuclear professional human resource training, agricultural pest control and
food safety, health care infrastructure construction and public health, water resources
and environmental management.

Mr. Chairman,
China highly values the cooperation with other countries in the field of peaceful use
of nuclear energy under the premise of nuclear non-proliferation, and has been always
committed to sharing the experience of peaceful use of nuclear energy. China
2

attaches particular importance to the cooperation with developing countries, and has
been working towards providing assistance to other countries that aspire to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including emerging nuclear power countries. All
these partnerships have received safeguard or supervision by the IAEA, or been
carried out under IAEA technical cooperation projects. The JCPOA has entered into
the stage of implementation, China upholds a responsible attitude to the
implementation of the JCPOA, and has carried out fruitful cooperation with the
United States, Iran and other parties, promoting the renovation project of the Arak
heavy water reactor to make progress.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear security and nuclear safety is an important premise of the healthy and
sustainable development of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. China has always
attached great importance to related issues. China has upheld the "safety first, quality
first" approach in nuclear energy development. We have set up a strict regulatory
system on nuclear safety, and have kept an excellent safety record. After Fukushima
nuclear accident, China carried out in-depth research and draw lessons from the
accident. Besides, a comprehensive nuclear safety inspection was carried out in China,
which investigated risks term-by-term, formulated rectification plans, improved the
regulatory system in nuclear field and enriched the nuclear safety supervision and
nuclear emergency-respond team. China is undergoing the legislative process of the
Atomic Energy Act, the Nuclear Safety Act and the Nuclear Security Regulations. At
present, all nuclear power units in mainland China have maintained a good safe
operation record.
Mr. Chairman:
The establishment of a global nuclear security system is the common responsibility of
the international community. The international community should adhere to a sensible,
coordinated and balanced value of nuclear security. All countries should step up
political input, enhance national responsibility, intensify international cooperation and
consolidate the culture of nuclear security, improve regulations and standards system,
strengthen capacity building, establish a network for education and training, make
joint efforts to build a global nuclear security system featuring fairness and
cooperation with mutual benefit.
Since its operation in March 2016, the Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security has
carried out a series of training activities in cooperation with the IAEA. We will use
existing platforms including the CoE and the China Customs Radiation Detection
Training Center to organize training programs of nuclear security professionals,
exercises and exchanges regarding nuclear security technologies and other activities.
We welcome the participation of Asia Pacific countries, countries along the Belt and
Road and other developing countries in relevant projects and will stay in close
cooperation with the IAEA. Recently, the project of low-enrichment conversion of the
3

Ghana Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) undertaken by China has achieved
a milestone, we are willing to build on the Ghana model and help countries convert
HEU-fueled MNSR imported from China under the principle of voluntarism and
pragmatism.
Mr. Chairman,
The Chinese delegation has submitted a working paper on the issue of peaceful uses
of nuclear energy which elaborates China's relevant positions. We hope the elements
contained therein will be reflected in the report of this PrepCom. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

4

