Statement by the Czech Republic
Cluster III
Second session of the Preparatory Committee to the NPT
Geneva, 23 April - 4 May 2018

Mr. Chairman,

The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement of the European Union delivered in this Cluster.
I would like, however, to use this opportunity to make a few remarks from our national perspective .
With respect to its territory and population, the Czech Republic has a relatively extensive nuclear
programme oriented entirely at peaceful use of nuclear energy. The Czech Republic has six
operating nuclear power reactors. Four VVER-440 units at Dukovany Nuclear Power Plant and two
VVER-1000 units at Temelin Nuclear Power Plant. Nuclear power accounts for almost one-third of
our country's electricity production. Above that the Czech Republic also operates two research and
one training reactor, two interim storages of spent nuclear fuel and several another small nuclear
facilities.
The Czech Republic is taking fully into account the importance of maintaining the highest
reasonably achievable standards in nuclear safety, radiation protection and emergency planning.
We exercise therefore a considerable effort to make sure that the necessary infrastructure and
financial, human and research resources have sufficient capacity to meet our responsibilities in this
field.
We are a steadfast supporter of international co-operation on these issues. In this regard, we
recognise the IAEA as the principal body for the transfer of expertise and technology in all areas
relating to peaceful use of nuclear energy. Our country is involved in financing of a number of
technical assistance projects prepared in co-operation with the IAEA. The Czech Republic holds
every year fellowship programmes for experts from developing countries which usually entail
scientific visits of more than 30 persons from Eastern and Central Europe, Asia, Africa and Southern
America, dedicated to nuclear safety, safeguards, nuclear research, radiation protection, waste
management and nuclear medicine . Last year we dispatched teams of our nuclear expe11sto several
East European countries to assist there with education of local personnel. Above that, the Czech
Republic contributed in 2017 more than 280 .000 EUR to the Fund of Technical Cooperation
Program and we also made an extra-budgetary contribution of almost 80.000 EUR through the
IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative for the Armenian project for Upgrading national nuclear regulatory
infrastructure.
Mr . Chairman,

The Czech Republic firmly supp011s the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to
development, research, production and use of nuclear energy. We also recognize the right to procure
equipment, materials and exchange scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes,
as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT. At the same time we understand that for the purpose of safe
use of nuclear energy the recipient countries have to sign, ratify and implement international
agreements and conventions creating an international legal framework for a safe management of

both nuclear facilities and nuclear material. Once all legal requirements are met and all principles
of nuclear non-proliferation are followed, nothing should hamper the spirit of international cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy among States Parties to the Treaty.
The Czech Republic is also pleased to inform, that it hosted in 2017 an Integrated Regulatory
Review Service Follow-Up mission. The IAEA experts confirmed that the Czech Republic has
significantly enhanced its regulatory framework for nuclear and radiation safety and implemented
recommendations made by the original IRRS mission in 2013. The IRRS Follow-Up team also
noted that the new Atomic Act, in force since the start of 2017, and the development of supporting
regulatory decrees based on IAEA safety standards represent significant achievements in improving
our regulatory architecture. Also the Czech Republic has just recently sent a formal request to the
IAEA for an International Physical Protection Advisory Service mission, which we should host in
2020. Because of our very positive experience with the IAEA missions, we'd like to encourage all
states to explore the benefits of these missions and consider requesting one.
Mr. Chairman,
The Czech Republic is proud on its participation in a Member States Support Programme to the
IAEA Safeguards. Our main focus is on tasks providing training activities for the Agency inspectors
and other IAEA technical personnel. Other tasks cover testing of new safeguards equipment,
including new surveillance systems at Czech nuclear facilities, as well as engagement of Czech
experts in various services provided to the IAEA. In total, we have currently 12 active tasks and
one task on stand-by.
One of our MSSP tasks I'd like to mention focuses on developing the ability to identify and isolate
single nuclear material containing particles from swipe samples through a cutting edge technique
called Fission Track. The Czech Republic gladly provides its irradiation facility and subsequent
analytical processing to the Safeguards Analytical Laboratory in Seibersdorf, in order to contribute
to the improvement of Agency's future capability to detect undeclared activities and materials.
Through this we indirectly help the IAEA to draw safeguards conclusions in more effective and
timely manner.
Finally, I'd like to close my remarks with commending Norway for orgamzmg
the 3rd International Symposium on Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) Minimisation in Oslo this
June. This is a noble effort dedicated to removing the most proliferation sensitive nuclear materials
from civilian use and the Czech Republic is proud to participate in it.
I thank you for your attention.

