
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy have a special importance for developing countries in their efforts to face developmental challenges.
Article IV of the Treaty establishes the inalienable right of all the parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with articles I and II. In paragraph 2, article IV calls on parties in a position to do so, to facilitate the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy with due consideration to the needs of the developing areas of the world.
The recent global increase in the prospects of utilizing nuclear energy for power generation confirms the necessity to implement paragraph 2 of article IV of the Treaty, as well as the relevant parts of the 2000 Review Conference Final Document, in order to facilitate the transfer of technology to promote the use of nuclear power as one of the main options available to humanity in view of the increasing scarcity of fossil fuels and the apparent complications related to the production of bio-fuels,
Egypt hopes that the 2010 Review Conference will be able to determine concrete steps to facilitate the transfer of technology, equipment, material and consultative services necessary for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, including through strengthening the IAEA's role in this field by securing adequate and predictable resources for its technical cooperation activities in line with the outcome of the 2000 Review Conference.
The annual debate about the funding targeted for the Agency's Technical Cooperation Fund at a time when the main donor countries call upon strengthening the safeguards system raises doubts about the extent of the commitment of all Parties to implement the principal objectives of the Treaty in a balanced manner.
The 2000 Review Conference has recognized that the right to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the fundamental objectives of the Treaty. It noted the contribution that such uses make to progress in general and to help overcome the technological and economic disparities between developed and developing countries. It urged that in all activities designed to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, preferential treatment should be given to non-nuclear weapon states parties to the Treaty , taking the needs of developing countries in particular into account. This of course should be coupled with the application of all necessary safeguards required under article III to prevent any diversion to military purposes.
Egypt reaffirms once again that the follow-up and implementation of the 3 pillars of this Treaty have to be done in a balanced manner. The right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy in our view is no less important than any of the other pillars of the Treaty. It provides one concrete incentive for non nuclear weapon States in return for acceding to the Treaty and implementing the ensuing commitments. Restricting this inalienable right according to selective political considerations, or the attempt to impose additional criteria
or conditions that were not mentioned explicitly in Article III of the Treaty, that made the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements the only criterion for verification of peaceful uses, affects the credibility of the Treaty as well as that of its review process. Reinventing concepts that were not envisaged in the Treaty, such as "sensitive, or proliferation resistant technologies", for the purpose of restricting exports to States Parties that do respect their commitments and limiting the options available to them is not acceptable.
This regrettable situation is aggravated when nuclear weapon States parties enter into new agreements, or update existing ones, with states that are not parties and refuse to undertake any commitment in the field of disarmament, in order to enhance their capabilities in the field of power generation or nuclear safety without requiring from them to join the Treaty and apply the IAEA comprehensive safeguards to all their nuclear installations. The argument that these non parties do not have obligations to comply with in the first place is a futile argument. Any such agreement contravenes the spirit and text of the Treaty. It runs counter to the obligations of the nuclear weapon States parties under Article I, paragraph 2 of article III and paragraph 12 of the Decision of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference on the Principles and Objectives of the Treaty that considered the acceptance of the IAEA full scope safeguards and internationally legally binding commitments not to acquire nuclear weapons a precondition for new supply arrangements.
Mr. Chairman, the 2000 Review Conference confirmed that each country's choices and decisions in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected without jeopardizing its fuel cycle policies. We are currently studying the different initiatives related to multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle in order to provide supply assurances for countries that use nuclear power plants. We understand the need to provide credible assurances for fuel supply especially to developing countries. It is of course irrational to let a developing country invest huge resources to build a nuclear power plant, and then leave the capacity to make it operational dependant on political considerations. Yet, we reaffirm that such initiatives should adhere to their declared objectives and avoid imposing conditions that contradict the Treaty or the outcomes of its previous Review Conferences. We also underline that any arrangements or decisions taken by a country or group of countries in this regard does not and should not affect the options available to other countries in accordance with their sovereign rights and independent decisions.
Finally, Egypt reaffirms its commitment to all three pillars of the Treaty, all its provisions and the outcomes of its previous Review Conferences. We look forward to benefit from the opportunities they open for the transfer of equipment and knowledge for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We also look forward to a similar commitment by all parties in a position to do so, and especially nuclear States parties, to their obligations to provide equipment, materials and technologies to other parties to promote the benefits of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.