Statementby
H.E. AmbassadorAlaa YOUSSEF
Permanent Representativeof Egyptto the United Nations,Geneva

The SecondSessionof the Preparatory Committeeto the
2020 NPf ReviewConference

Cluster IIL
PeacefulUsesof Nuclear Energy

Geneva, 1 May 2018

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,

The peaceful uses of nuclear energy is an essential pillar of the NPT
and remains an inalienable right of all states party to the Treaty, in
accordance with Article IV. As we continue to work towards the
upcoming Review Conference, we must reaffirm the importance of
cooperation between member states to develop research, production, and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
As interest in nuclear energy continues to expand, we must
continue to support exchange of equipment, materials, and scientific and
technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We
should all stand ready to work and support all efforts that promote
cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy without
discrimination.
Mr. Chairman,
Cooperation in the field of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
should be pursued in good faith and exclude any measures that hinder
such cooperation. Egypt expresses its concern at continued attempts by
some state parties to the Treaty to promo te such measures and call$ upon
the removal of any restrictions or limitations on the transfer of nuclear
equipment, materials, and technological information for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. We emphasize that the Treaty encourages the
transfer or use of nuclear technology and as such, we regret the
inclination by some state parties to propose measures and adopt policies
that run contrary to the objectives of the NPT by restricting international
cooperation and limiting assistance in this field.

Indeed, such an approach can only undermine the Tre aty and
erode its credibility. This is further complicated by the fact that some
states party to the Treaty enter in new nuclear agreements with states not
party to the NPT that have not accepted full sc0pe comprehensive IAEA ·
safeguards. Discussion on their inclusion as full members in plurilateral
nuclear groups related to nuclear exports sends the wro ng messages and
weakens the incentive for these States to join the NPT and reduces the
prospect of achieving its universality.
We stress that multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle,
including proposa ls for assurance of supply, needs to fully take into
account all technical, legal, political, and economic complexities

surrounding these issues. The right of states party to obtain a full nuclear
fuel cycle and expanding their own production capacity in the nuclear
fuel cycle should not be compromised.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt recognizes the important role the IAEA plays in assisting
state parties to the Treaty, in particular in the use of nuclear science and
technology. The IAEA Technical Cooperation Program remains an
essential component that plays a crucial role in the process of transfer of
nuclear technology to developing countries and enhance their scientific
and technological capabi lities. Attempts to politicize the work of the
Agency, including its technical cooperatio n program should be
prevented.

The statue of the IAEA stipulates the right of member states to use
atomic energy for peaceful purposes and to promote socio-economic
development through technical cooperation, with due consideration for
the needs of developing countries. We stres.s th e importance of nuclear
knowledge-sharing and the transfer of nuclear technology to developing
countries to advance and expand their scientific and technological
capabili ties.
Mr. Chairman,
Egypt believes that nuclear security remains the sovereign national
responsibility of state parties to the NPT. It is thei r responsibility to
update their respective national legislations, ensure their nuclear
material and related technology are appropriately contro lled and
monitored, and adopt multifaceted measures that safeguard nuclear and
radioactive material from any potential misuse.

We emphasize that the IAEA has the central role in th e field of
nuclear security and that any process to develop multilateral norms and
guidelines should be pursued w ithin the framework of the IAEA. There
is a detectable growing inclination by some state parties to the NPT that
seeks to associate the degree of their cooperation in the field of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy with the standards and measures adopted by
states with regards to nuclear security. We believe that this association
has no legal grounds and has the potential of being misused as a pretext
to deny or restrict the exchange of nuclear equipment, material, and
technology . Thank you.

