EMBASSY
OF THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
VIENNA

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Omar Amer
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt
to the International Organizations in Vienna

The First Session of the Preparatory Committee to the
2020 NPf Review Conference

Cluster III:
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy

Vienna, May 2017

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,

As global interest in nuclear energy continues to expand
across the world with evident momentum and while
developing countries are increasingly investing in their
national nuclear infrastructures, it becomes imperative that
the new review cycle of the NPT once again reaffirms,
collectively, the importance of promoting international
cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Article IV of the NPT was explicit and straightforward;
state parties to the NPT had the inalienable right to develop
research, production, and the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination and undertake to
facilitate, and participate in, the fullest possible exchange of
equipment,

materials,

and

scientific

and

technological

information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,

Despite

the

NPT's

unequivocal

commitment and

championing of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, we are
deeply concerned with what seems to be continued attempts
by some state parties to the NPT to promote unilateral and
plurilateral measures that hinder the fullest possible exchange
of equipment, materials, and technological information for the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We regret the inclination by
some state parties to propose measures and adopt policies that

seemingly run contrary to the objectives of the NPT by
restricting international cooperation and limiting assistance in
this field

with varying, and oftentimes, unconvincing

justifications. This approach and spirit can only undermine
the NPT and erode its credibility.
It is important to underscore that the NPT does not

prohibit in anyway the use or transfer of nuclear technology,
material, or equipment for peaceful purposes on criterion
based on sensitivity. Restricting the transfer of sensitive
material and technology contravenes the provisions and spirit
of the NPT, especially that all such material would be subject
to full scope IAEA safeguards.
Mr. Chairman,

As a strong supporter for the transfer of nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes to developing countries to
promote socio-economic development, Egypt stresses that the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Program plays a vital role in the
process of transfer of nuclear technology and know-how to
developing countries. We believe that the current guidelines
and criteria of the IAEA for the selection of technical
cooperation projects are effective enough that do not warrant
additional criteria to be imposed for fulfilling the above
objective. Accordingly, Egypt rejects attempts that seek to
politicize the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, including its technical cooperation program. We

believe that empowering the IAEA to support this program,
and under its guidance, the international community will be
advancing the fullest possible cooperation for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,

Although the NPT was explicit in its call to facilitate the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and
scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy among its State Parties, we are deeply
alarmed that some state parties to the NPT are engaging in
cooperative exchanges in the field of nuclear technology but
with States Non-Party to the NPT. We believe this is a serious
drawback with significant negative repercussions. At a time
when the nuclear nonproliferation regime faces significant
challenges and while countries grapple to strengthen this
regime and uphold its values, some state parties are offering
assistance and engaging in bilateral cooperation with states
that have rebuffed the NPT and refused to be part of its
regime. Moreover, discussion on their inclusion as full
members in plurilateral nuclear groups related to nuclear
exports sends the wrong messages and weakens the incentive
for these States to join the NPT and reduces the prospect of
achieving its universalization.

We therefore, take this opportunity to strongly call for
the enforcement, without exception or further delay, of the
total and complete prohibition, as stipulated in the NPT, of the
transfer of all nuclear related equipment, information,
material, and facilities, resources, and devices and the
extension

of

assistance

in

the

nuclear,

scientific,

or

technological fields to
Mr. Chairman,

As global interest in nuclear power generation continues
to expand across the globe, it becomes imperative that the
international community ensures that appropriate measures
aimed at improving nuclear security and nuclear safety are
enforced. However, while improving regulations should be
welcomed, we are nevertheless concerned that in the global
pursuit to ensure nuclear security and safety, there is a
detectable growing inclination by some state parties to the
NPT that seeks to associate the degree of their cooperation in
the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy with the standards
and measures adopted by states with regards to nuclear
security. We believe that this association has no legal grounds
and has the potential of being politically misused as a pretext
to deny or restrict the exchange of nuclear equipment,
material, and technology.

Mr. Chairman,

We would like to stress that multilateral approaches to
the nuclear fuel cycle, including proposals for assurance of
supply, needs to fully take into account all technical, legal,
political, and economic complexities surrounding these issues.
They should be conducted through wide, inclusive, and
transparent multilateral consultations and negotiations. There
is concern while some NPT State parties and supplier states
address issues related to the multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle, they are creating the possibility of a process
that may lead to the erosion of Article IV of the NPT. Once
again, nothing should restrict state parties to the NPT from
exercising their inalienable right to

develop

research,

prod uction, and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination.
Mr. Chairman,

As we embark on a new Review Cycle for the NPT, we
would like to stress that the full, effective, and nondiscriminatory implementation of Article IV of the Treaty
plays a crucial role in achieving the objective and purpose of
the Treaty. We hope this new review cycle will present new
practical ideas that contribute to advancing cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy among NPT State Parties.
Thank you.

