Statement of Egypt
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
of the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, New York, 28 April -9 May 2014
Cluster III Issues: Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy

Mr. Chairman,
1. The delegation of Egypt associates itself with the statement delivered by Indonesia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the working paper presented by
Iraq, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, on the issue of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear
Energy.
Mr. Chairman,
2. Article IV of the NPT confirms, in absolute clarity, the inalienable right of all
States Party to the Treaty, to benefit, to the maximum extent possible, from nuclear
technology, without discrimination. Under the Treaty, each and every State Party has
the right to develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
3. While global energy needs are in constant increase, in particular, in developing
countries, these countries seek to realize their growing developmental aspirations and
their need for clean reliable energy, as well as non-power nuclear applications that can
serve their growing economies.
4. For Egypt, like many developing countries with extensive nuclear experience,
sizeable populations and rapidly expanding industrial and economic needs, the
introduction of nuclear energy to the national energy mix is dictated by a pressing
practical need rather than a mere political choice.
5. Egypt has been among pioneer States in its awareness of the importance of the
peaceful applications of nuclear energy for development and growth, and has thus
attached great importance to its nuclear programme. The programme is dedicated
basically to addressing two key challenging to sustainable development, namely:
generation of electric power and water resources.

6. In 2007, Egypt announced the launch of a programme to construct 4 nuclear power
units, in cooperation with international partners and the IAEA. A series of practical
steps to that end have taken place to prepare the grounds for this endeavor, including
infra-structure, legislative, institutional and regulatory steps. Due to the current
political developments in the context of democratic transformation underway in
Egypt, it was decided not to request international bids for the set-up of those plants
before a democratically elected Parliament, expected to be in place in few months, can
endorse these plans.
7. Egypt strongly supports the active role of the IAEA in providing guidance to
member States in the construction and operation of their nuclear power plants and in
the technical support and safety standards it employs for their full benefit in the
nuclear power area as well as in other areas including health, food, agriculture,
environmental protection and water resources.
8. In order to enable the IAEA to sufficiently perform that role, resources for the
Technical Cooperation Programme have to be sufficient, assured and predictable. The
Programme also has to develop in a manner that enables the Agency to respond to the
needs of its member States consistent with its Statute, relevant decisions of its policy
making organs and with the overall framework of obligations dictated by the NPT.
9. While we continue to advance further technical cooperation with the Agency, we
also continue to put our long experience in the nuclear field at the disposal of Arab
and African partners, through various cooperation programmes, in implementation of
Article IV of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
10. Egypt believes that peaceful uses of nuclear energy are to be protected and
promoted in implementation of Article IV of the Treaty. This inalienable right should
not, under any circumstances, be subject to discrimination, political favoritism or bias.
The more we succeed in treating the inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear
technology as a clear legal consequent of the Treaty, the closer we will be to the
NPT’s proper implementation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

