Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
First session, Vienna, 2-12 May 2017
Agenda item 6; cluster III issues
Statement by Finland

Mr Chairman,
I associate myself fully with the statement made by the European Union. In addition,
I would like to make following remarks in my national capacity.
Mr. Chairman
Finland was the first country to agree on a Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
with the IAEA and has produced nuclear energy safely and reliably for almost 40
years. Today, one third of Finland’s electricity is produced by nuclear power.
The operation of nuclear power plants together with modernisation, improvement and
construction projects have increased knowhow throughout the nuclear related
industry in Finland. We attach great importance to the improvement of nuclear safety
and security. It is essential that countries using nuclear power, or embarking on
nuclear power, have a sound legislative and regulatory framework on nuclear and
radiation safety.
There are currently two ongoing NPP projects in Finland. These new builds and the
currently operating four nuclear power plant units, together with increased renewable
energy, will play a very important role in the electricity production and in achieving
our emission reduction targets.
The responsible use of nuclear energy includes a nuclear waste management strategy.
This should always be considered from the very beginning of the development of a
nuclear power programme. In 2015 Finland granted a construction license for the

final underground repository for spent nuclear fuel. Globally, this is the first final
disposal facility project that has proceeded into the construction phase. The
underground repository will make use of the most advanced technology that has
mainly been developed in Finland. It will meet strict safety, security and safeguards
requirements.
The security of nuclear materials and facilities is given a high priority in Finland.
Finland has also provided financial and in-kind support to nuclear security
worldwide, including through the Nuclear Security Fund (NSF) of the IAEA.
Mr Chairman,
The NPT constitutes the global framework for reliable cooperation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In order to ensure the peaceful use of nuclear technology
worldwide, the basic requirement is that IAEA safety standards and security guidance
are applied to all cooperation involving nuclear and/or radiological material.
The responsible use of nuclear energy includes effective control of the nuclear
material and the fuel cycle, as well as a nuclear waste management strategy. These
are the key components in Finland’s international cooperation on the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
Thank you Mr. Chairman

