Mr. Chairman,
I.

The French Delegation fully supports with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union by the Danish Presidency.

Mr. Chairman,
2.

The last NPT Review Conference in 2010 saw the reiteration of the right of
States to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as defined in Asticle
IV,within the context of trust and cooperation favourable to its development
offered by the Treaty, and under the best conditions of safety, security and
non-proliferation. For a long time France has been fully committed to ensuring
the comprehensive application of the provisions of Article IV to ensure that all
States who scrupulously comply with their international obligations and
pursue nuclear activities for peaceful purposes in good faith can benefit from
applications of the atom in fields as varied as energy, healthcare, agriculture or
environmental protection.

3. One year on from the Fukushima accident, we can already draw a first
important conclusion on the outlook for the development of nuclear energy: in
the mid-term, the accident which occurred in the Japanese plant will only have
a limited impact on the growth of nuclear power across the world. While some
countries have announced a review of their energy strategy with regards to
nuclear energy or a phase-out of the use of this energy, the vast majority of
States who already had a nuclear power programme or who had announced
before March 2011 that they wished to go down this route have confirmed their
choices. To resume the situation, there are now 435 nuclear reactors in
operation across the world, with 64 currently under construction, including 43
iia Asia.

4. A s part of a responsible energy policy, France has chosen nuclear energy as the
main source of its electricity supply. After 30 years of continuous improvement
in the field, it now operates 58 reactors, producing between 75% and 80% of
its electricity. This energy mix has enabled France to build up unique knowhow in the design and long-term operation of nuclear power plants. It has
extensive expertise in the entire nuclear fuel cycle, and applies a rigorous and
exacting policy in terms of safety, security, non-proliferation and the
management of radioactive waste. Its nuclear industry is sustained by dynamic
and innovative research.
5. France contributes to the development of the nuclear sector across the world
through a range of international cooperation, providing its skills and expertise
to its partners. Furthermore, it actively supports the work of the I& in
promoting nuclear energy, and intends to continue and strengthen this
support even further, in particular in terms of improving human resources in
the nuclear sector, which we believe is a major challenge. Every year, France
hosts a number of training workshops and courses linked to the
implementation of nuclear power programmes. For example, this summer it
will renew a partnership with the IAEA by organising a training session on
supervision and management roles for the second time, with a view to the
launch and development of nuclear power programmes. The first session in
2011 brought together thirty participants from 25 States, in Africa, Asia and
Latin America.

6. Also in the field of training, the International Institute of Nuclear Energy
(I2EN) whose creation was announced in 2010 is now in place and fully
operational, ready to play its role as coordinator of France's nuclear training
programmes.
7. We are convinced that the responsible development of civil nuclear energy,
meeting the strictest standards in terms of safety, security and nonproliferation, contributes to the implementation of the NPT and strengthens
the legitimacy of the international non-proliferation regime.

8. First imperative: ensure that the development of civil nuclear energy will never
help a proliferating country. This fundamental imperative is central to the
NPT. Although the Treaty recognizes in Article IV the inalienable right of
States to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy, that right is not
unconditional. In accordance with the Treaty, the exercise of this right is
conditional upon a peaceful purpose, a commitment to non-proliferation and
satisfactory implementation of I m safeguards.
9. In order to develop solid bilateral cooperation, France encourages its partners

to complement their comprehensive safeguards agreements with an additional
protocol and to adhere to all of the international agreements in the field of
nuclear energy. The credibility and effectiveness of IAl3A's safeguards system
are essential with respect to ensuring the responsible development of civil
nlzclear energy.
propose suspending an>- nuclear cooperation ~\itlzthe
eiiili;:i ii*sthat do not ~espect
their internaiiilil?~'lob?igGtlon.,.

Mr. Chairman,
10. Due to its expertise in the nuclear sector, France has a long-standing interest
in promoting initiatives linked to multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel
cycle. Security of supply is a core requirement for the responsible development
of nuclear energy, and must be the subject of collective commitments. It is
acknowledged that the nuclear fuel cycle market functions well, and it is
important it continues to do so in order to ensure demand is optimally met.
Nevertheless, the risk of supply disruptions cannot be eliminated. This risk
could hinder certain countries' access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
encouraging them to equip with a national fuel cycle which is not the most
economically rational.
11. That

is why France wishes to promote pragmatic and concrete solutions
adapted to the market and the needs of beneficiary countries, in compliance
with the NPT. In particular, it co-sponsored the creation of the LEU
International Bank under the aegis of the IAEA in December 2010, and
supported Russian initiatives to set up fuel reserves in Angarsk as well as the
British NFA (Nuclear Fuel Assurance) initiative.

Mr. Chairman,
12.25 years after the Chernobyl disaster, the accident which occurred on 11March
2011 in the Fukushima-Daiichi plant is a major event in the history of the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. The nuclear crisis in Japan was the tragic
result of an unprecedented natural disaster, and while it has shown us that
some of the lessons from Chernobyl have been learnt, especially in terms of
transparency and the protection of human life, it has also shown us that there
remains work to be done.
13. The adoption of the IAEA's nuclear safety action plan last September was an
essential step towards the global strengthening of nuclear safety. The
international community came together to draw lessons from the Fukushima
accident and demonstrate a responsible approach in order to avoid another
major nuclear accident.
q . I n this regard, France is determined to actively contribute to the
implementation of the IAEA action plan, in particular by making its expertise
available to others.
15. First of all, from an early stage, my country drafted concrete proposals on
setting up an international rapid response mechanism and an international
network of national and regional nuclear crisis management training centres
so that IAEA Member States could become more involved in these areas, under
the aegis of the Agency. We argue for the implementation of a system whose
effectiveness is based on two components:
3

strengllefi;ng tile ;apacit>- of Stares to -prepare for and respond to ai;cidiint:;
1)-fthifitheir oo\mborders, iviiich is their primary respoilsibi/i@;

and the fast deployment of resources (experts or specialised equipment) which
these States can provide for regional and international assistance efforts,
relying on strengthened coordination and pooling mechanisms, under the
aegis of the Agency.
16.Maintaining the highest levels of safety in nuclear facilities requires a
continuous improvement approach. My delegation also supports the
development and universal application of peer reviews, on a regular and
systematic basis, in each country implementing a nuclear power programme,
the results of which should be made public. We believe that this is one of the
major lessons which can be drawn from the Fukushima accident. At a national
level, France, which welcomed the first IRRS (International Regulatory Review
Service) mission in 2006, as well as a follow-up mission in 2009, has informed
the IAEA that the French Nuclear Safety Authority (ASN - Autoritc! de Siiretk
Nuclc!aire)would be prepared to welcome another IRRS mission in 2014 and a
follow-up mission in 2016. The teams of experts assembled by the IAEA have
conducted 23 OSART missions in French nuclear power plants since 1985.
These missions are particularly useful in promoting a culture of safety, by
promoting contact between these experts and French operators. Four new
missions have been requested for between now and 2014.
17. As you know, France has decided to subject all its nuclear facilities to
additional safety assessments. On 3 January 2012, the French Nuclear Safety
Authority (ASN) submitted the first conclusions of the audit requested by the
Prime Minister in order to draw lessons from the Fukushima accident.
According to these conclusions, all the French nuclear facilities subjected to
the audit met the required safety levels to continue operating. Their continued
operation will require the robustness of facilities under extreme conditions to
be strengthened, over and above existing safety margins, in particular through
the implementation of a "hard core" of material and organisational provisions
enabling full control of basic safety functions in such situations, as well as the
implementation of a nuclear rapid response force in France, at a national level,
by EDF. The ministers responsible for nuclear safety will submit a report in
September on the implementation of the recommendations made by the ASN.
X

18.Finally, stress tests conducted by European Union States have been peerreviewed. The feedback from this process could be used to improve the method
created by the IAEA in 2011 to assess the vulnerabilities of nuclear power
reactors to extreme natural risks.

19. On a global scale, we must also act to universally apply and strengthen existing
legal instruments. That is why we are arguing for the full implementation of
the four conventions relating to nuclear safety, and invite all States which have
not yet done so to sign up to these international instruments. With regards to
the important issue of civil nuclear liability, France would like to draw the
attention of all State Parties to the importance of universally applying a
nuclear civil liability regime. That is ivhj7 France, in close collaboration with its
partners, col~tiiltresto xrorli totvartls the mil-ersal implementation of a regime
rl hich i t ~ ~ ~be
l i l bas-d
d
on ;lac Vienil;, ,~ndP;iris Coil\ cntiorns aiad t h e i r Jo;rit
Pro"ioc1.

Mr. Chairman,
2o.In the field of nuclear security, in compliance with the commitment made by
the President of the French Republic at the Washington Summit in April 2010,
France welcomed an IPPAS (International Physical Protection Advisory
Service) mission in November 2011, which assessed our national regime for
the physical protection of nuclear facilities and its implementation in one of
our nuclear power plants. In 2013, in collaboration with the IAEX, France will
welcome the first international workshop dedicated to the lessons learnt from
this kind of mission.
21. Furthermore,

France is especially involved in the issue of the safety and
security of radioactive sources. We will continue to support the international
efforts deployed by the IAEA to improve the safe and secure management of
radioactive sources. We have therefore achieved an initial survey of all sources
of French origin exported throughout the world in order to implement, if
necessary, measures to repatriate or secure disused sources which could
present risks. An operation to repatriate a category I source was conducted in
Madagascar in October, in collaboration with the IAEA.

Mr. Chairman,
22.

AS recalled in the action plan adopted by the NPT Review Conference in May
2010, the atom has an essential role to play outside the production of
electricity, in the fields of healthcare, agriculture or the management of water
resources, helping the poorest countries to develop and fulfilling their real
needs. France would like to pay tribute to the driving role played by the IAEA
in this area. By promoting nuclear science and nuclear applications, and
through its programme of technical cooperation, the Agency actively
contributes to the fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goals.

23.Aware of the importance of the needs of developing countries faced with severe
food problems and the sharp increase in the number of cancer cases, and
convinced that nuclear technologies can make a major contributiop to fulfilling
basic human needs, my country is continuing to cooperate with the IAEA to
support projects by providing its expertise on the ground while welcoming
several dozen trainees every year from these countries into its nuclear
medicine laboratories or divisions.
Mr. Chairman,
a4.The responsible development of nuclear energy is a major challenge for the
future of our planet. We must continue to work to promote this development,
which will enable the international community to find solutions to meet the
very substantial economic, environmental and human challenges which lie
ahead,
25.On rhe u-chei. hand, nor\ more than er ei*,n-~ielearsafe[! 111tr;t be an absoltrti?

prioriw and guide our actions in terms of the development of nuclear energy.

France has always argued in favour of the highest nuclear safety levels and for
responsible nuclear development throughout the world. The accident in Japan
served as a tragic confirmation of the relevance of this extremely strict and
thoroughgoing policy on nuclear safety and transparency. This is a collective
priority.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

