Mr President,
The French Delegation would first like to fully associate itself with the statement made by the European
Union.

Mr President,
Developing civil nuclear energy is essential to meet the NPT objectives. All States must be able to benefit
from civil nuclear applications when they meet their international obligations and when they use, in good
faith, nuclear activities for peaceful purposes. This is one of the keys which enabled almost all States to
adhere to the Treaty.
There are currently 443 power reactors operating around the world, and another 65 are under construction.
Four new constructions began last year. These figures show that many States continue to view nuclear
energy as a chance to meet their needs, while contributing to the fight against climate change which means
that today, decarbonated energy sources must be sought.

7
France masters all nuclear technologies, from research to electricity production, from uranium conversion to
the management of radioactive waste. France is working actively on the nuclear energy of the future, on the
basis of research on 4th generation reactors and through the construction of the ITER reactor, which is
continuing in Cadarache as part of an international project. With this experience, France intends to continue
contributing to this development, through widespread international cooperation and through its ongoing
support to the IAEA.
In doing so, France wants to work towards responsible development of nuclear energy, which is inclusive
and respectful of our common future, our population and other States. For this purpose, the strictest
standards must be put in place, as they also provide the best protection in terms of safety, security and nonproliferation.

Mr President,
To promote this responsible development of nuclear energy, it is essential to train new generations of
"civilian nuclear elites", to whom we will be able to entrust our power plants.
Yet, to produce electronuclear energy, not just hundreds but thousands of technicians will need to be trained.
Given the existing training capacities, this constitutes a challenge.
This is why France, in addition to the training activities it has been conducting for years, decided to launch
the Capacity Building Initiative. This initiative intends to bring together all States which want to work
collectively to identify how to better share skills and increase the international offer of training assistance.
States that would like launch or develop a nuclear power programme, in particular newcomers, must pay
special attention to issues relating to teaching, training and human resource management. Given the higher
requirements on safety and the large number of newcomers among the states currently constructing a reactor,
demand in the field is very high. This is a genuine challenge given existing capacities. All States must make
an effort to cooperate so that those which have chosen to use this energy have the human resources to have
access to it under the right conditions, and so that they know all the offers available to help them achieve it.
On 14-15 April, about ten States took part in a tour in France (Paris, Saclay and Cadarache) to discuss issues
related to this subject. The framework and objectives of this initiative will be presented during a side event
on Thursday 7 May at 1:15 p.m. in Room CR7. I encourage you all to attend and participate to this side
event.
In the same vein, we have supported since its beginning the IAEA initiative to facilitate Member States'
access to research reactors by setting up a process to designate International Centres based on Research
Reactor (ICERR). We are convinced that it will help to promote hands-on training on modern research
reactors with significant power, which already exist or are under construction.

8

The French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) thus submitted a candidacy to be
designated as an ICERR, based around the Jules Horowitz research reactor (JHR), currently under
construction in Cadarache, and related facilities in operation. This was the first candidacy received by the
IAEA and excellent cooperative work was carried out with the department of nuclear energy to conduct this
procedure. France is willing to help other States wishing to designate their own facilities as ICERRs.

Mr President,
This review cycle will be marked by the essential need for enhanced nuclear safety around the world. The
international community must continue its efforts to learn all the lessons from the Fukushima-Daiichi
accident. One of the key aspects of this feedback, the ability to manage nuclear or radiological emergency
situations, will be addressed at an event to be organized by the French delegation, in collaboration with the
United Arab Emirates, on Tuesday 12 May at 1:15 p.m. in Room CR7.
The IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety is an essential tool in this feedback process, initiated by the
international community. To promote transparency, France made public its national implementation Plan in
December 2012, based on the IAEA implementation plan. Its latest update was deposited as a working
document to the NPT Preparatory Committee last year. We encourage States which have not yet done so to
carry out a similar exercise. After the end of the Action Plan in 2015, it will be important to maintain a
multi-year process of international priorities in the area of nuclear safety.
Other areas of action must also be supported: the development and widespread implementation of
international peer-review missions is of these areas. In line with the Action Plan, it encourages all States,
through the multi-year programme, to request regular IRRS (Integrated Regulatory Review Service) and
OSART (Operational Safety Review Team) missions, and to publish their conclusions.
For its part, France hosted a new IRRS mission in 2014, following the 2006 mission and a "corporate
OSART" mission. This year, we will receive an OSART mission at the Dampierre plant as well as a followup mission at Chooz-B.
Strengthening the effective implementation of international conventions, including those on civil
nuclear liability, is another area of action.
We are encouraged by the Diplomatic Conference on the Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS) which last
February, with the unanimous support of its participants, agreed on the need to make a strong political
commitment: to continuously implement the necessary measures to increase the level of requirement on the
safety of nuclear facilities. It will be up to us to ensure that this commitment is fully implemented.

9
Furthermore, since the development of nuclear energy can only be responsible and inclusive if it provides
fair and equitable compensation for any damage, including in neighbouring States, France is committed to
developing a global civil nuclear liability regime. It requires the largest possible number of States joining
the international conventions on civil nuclear liability. In this regard, we welcome the entry into force last 15
April of the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, following ratification by
Japan. France also recalls that the revised Paris Convention (associated with the revised Brussels
Convention) as well as the revised Vienna Convention, linked by the Joint Protocol, form a suitable and fair
basis for compensating for nuclear damage.

Mr President,
France believes that these efforts must also go hand-in-hand with the strengthening of nuclear security.
There is an issue to which France has paid particular attention: the security of radioactive sources. To
improve the security of highly-radioactive sources, we must strengthen the international framework which
applies to them, we must move forward with research and the implementation of technologies which will no
longer use them, and we must increase cooperation among supplier States to improve the management of
end-of-life sources. It is an ambitious programme, which strengthens security and public health issues for all
of our States, without exception.
We will continue to support the efforts of the IAEA to improve the safe and secured management of
radioactive sources and as far as French-produced sources are concerned, we will continue, wherever
necessary, our actions to secure or to repatriate them. Since 2003, France has repatriated 18 Frenchproduced high activity sources and helped to secure almost 10,000 more on-site.

Mr President,
Finally, the responsible and inclusive development of civil nuclear energy must enable all needs to be met,
not only as regards energy, but also as regards health, agriculture, or environmental protection, and for
sustainable development. France welcomes and supports the action of the IAEA which, through its
technical cooperation programme, actively contributes to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
France is pleased that constructive dialogue was held in 2014 on the issue of the financing of the IAEA
activities.

To conclude, Mr President,

10
While access to nuclear energy is an essential issue for the future of our planet, particularly within the
context of the fight against climate change, I hope that this Review Conference can help us to make concrete
progress towards implementing the NPT, which remains the cornerstone of international nuclear solidarity.

Mr President, I thank you./.

