tion
"Chapter 3"

Mr. Chairman,
1. France fully associates itself to the statement made on behalf of the European
Union on this chapter.
2. I would like to add a few items from a national standpoint to this statement.

Mr. Chairman,
3. Convinced that the responsible development of civil nuclear energy, that is a
development meeting the strictest standards in terms of safety, security and nonproliferation, contributes to the implementation of the objectives of thEl NPT and
strengthens the legitimacy of the international non-proliferation regime, France
has long been committed to ensuring the comprehensive application of the
provisions of article N of the Treaty. All States who scrupulously comply with
their international obligations and pursue nuclear activities for peaceful purposes
in good faith should be able to benefit from nuclear applications.
4. The figures show that the development of the nuclear energy sector is continuing
apace: 68 reactors are currently under construction worldwide, with 437 in
operation. France welcomes the organization by the IAEA, in partnership with
OECD/NEA, of an International Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in the
21st Century in Saint Petersburg, Russia, at the end of June.
5. On the strength of more than 30 years experience in the operation of nuclear
power plants, and its expertise in the entire nuclear fuel cycle, France intends to
continue contributing to the development of the nuclear sector through its
numerous international cooperation initiatives and its constant support for the
actions of the IAEA in promoting nuclear energy. France intends to strengthen
this support even further, in particular in terms of improving human resources in
the nuclear sector, which we believe is a major challenge.

1

6. France will continue to use its unique know-how in the design and long-term
operation of nuclear power plants to strengthen nuclear safety throughout the
world.
Mr. Chairman,
7. The Fukushima disaster must lead to a revision of the practices and doctrines in
the field of nuclear safety, and France would like to share its experience to help
raise global standards in the field and promote the need for a strict and thorough
policy on nuclear safety and transparency.
8. During the ministerial conference on nuclear safety which was held in Fukushima
in December, Mrs Batho, the French Minister of Ecology, Sustainable
Development and Energy, highlighted the need for a strengthening of the
international safety framework. In particular, she emphasized the need for a
strong political commitment from the IAEA member states to move certain key
parts of the international safety framework forward: a strengthening of the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, emergency preparedness and response, and
nuclear civil liability. This initiative is in line with the IAEA's action plan and aims
to support its objectives.
9. During the Fukushima conference, France set out four proposals aiming to
strengthen the international safety framework:
10. Firstly,

to strengthen transparency, my country proposes that each State publish a
table monitoring their actions to implement the IAEA nuclear safety action plan.
France published this table for its own actions last December.

11.

'Secondly, make IRRS or OSART-type safety assessment peer reviews obligatory.
Initially this obligation could be taken on by a group of voluntary States. At
national level France welcomes an OSART mission within its borders every year,
and in 2013 following the review of the Chooz plant, will have seen an OSART
mission for all its reactors. A second IRRS-type review will be held in 2014.

12. Thirdly, we would like to create an international rapid response mechanism in the
event of a crisis. Responses to nuclear accidents must take effect at several levels.
At national level there are rapid response teams which can be deployed in less
than 24h. We are developing a strengthened cooperation with the United
Kingdom in this regard, and call on all States to coordinate their mechanisms.
Furthermore, France has submitted nine concrete proposals to the IAEA to
redefine the operatiomil role and means of action of the Agency's Incident and
Emergency Centre (lEC) in the event of a nuclear crisis.
13. Finally, France would like to call the attention of an States to the importance of
implementing a global nuclear civil liability regime. That is why France is
promoting the widest possible adherence to relevant conventions, such as the
revised Vienna or Paris Conventions, or even, when it comes into force, the
Convention on Supplementary Compensation through existing basic conventions.
The shared protocol of the Paris and Vienna Conventions is currently undergoing
2

parliamentary ratification in France. We are also actively working to define areas
of convergence with our American partners on this global nuclear civil liability
regIme.
Mr. Chairman,
14. In the field of nuclear safety, in compliance with the commitment made by the
Prime Minister at the Seoul Summit in April 2012, France, which hosted an IPPAS
(International Physical Protection Advisory Service) mission in November 2011,
will in December 2013, in collaboration with the lAEA, host the first international
conference devoted to lessons learned from, and the assessment of this type of
mission.
15. Furthermore, France is especially involved in the issue of the safety and security
of sources of radiation. We will continue to support the international efforts
deployed by the lAEA to improve the safe and secure management of sources of
radiation. For sources of radiation of French origin, we are pursuing all necessary
measures to make safe or repatriate sources, in cooperation with the Agency.

Mr. Chairman,
16. The nuclear sector has an essential role to play outside the production of
electricity, in the fields of healthcare, agriculture or the management of water
resources to promote the development of the poorest countries and meet their
actual needs. France would like to pay tribute to the driving role played by the
IAEA in this area. By promoting nuclear science and applications and through its
programme of technical cooperation, the Agency actively contributes to the
fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Mr. Chairman,
17. The responsible development of nuclear energy is a major challenge for the future

of our planet. We must continue to work to promote this development, which will
enable the international community to meet the sizeable economic, environmental
and human challenges which lie ahead. Equally, now more than ever, nuclear
safety must be an absolute priority and guide our actions in terms of the
development of nuclear energy. This is a collective priority.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

