CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY!
Statement by the Federal Republic of Germany at the First
Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Vienna 2 – 12 May 2017

Cluster III (Peaceful uses of nuclear energy)

Mr. Chairman,
First of all, I would like to align myself with the Statement by
the EU and the positions of the NPDI regarding pillar three of
the NPT.
We support the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme
and Peaceful Uses Initiative as effective means to promote
benefits of nuclear technology in areas such as human health,
agriculture, water management and industrial applications.
This support program covers not only the development of
equipment and procedures, but also the development of
safeguards approaches, training of Agency inspectors,
development of safeguards evaluation methods and the
appointment of cost-free experts to the IAEA.
1

Mr. Chairman,
I would like to underline that the third pillar is one of the
reasons why a functioning and fully effective NonProliferation Treaty is benefitting all of us, even those
amongst us who do not opt for the use of nuclear energy.
Those who do not use nuclear energy must be assured that
those who do maintain the highest standards of nuclear
safety.
Germany commends the IAEA for its crucial work regarding
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Maintaining satisfactory levels of nuclear security is a global
challenge, because the threat of nuclear terrorism has
reached global dimensions. No one should assume that the
threat only concerns those who actually use nuclear energy.
Terrorism does not respect borders. So-called failed states
add to the risks of nuclear materials falling out of regulatory
control.
The global nuclear security architecture plays an instrumental
role in reducing the risks of an incident of nuclear terrorism.
Nuclear security is an essential element to peaceful use and
should not be viewed as an impediment to the spread of such
use. All of those engaged in peaceful nuclear activities want
assurance that they are not facing undue risks from nuclear
accidents or malicious efforts.
Germany contributed to the process in the field of improving
security of radioactive sources and the protection from cyber
2

attacks against nuclear facilities. Much work needs still to be
done. We support the IAEA’s central role in the global nuclear
security architecture and we do hope that the momentum
can be maintained also in the NPT context.

3

