_I

Permanent Mission
of Germany
to the United Nations
New York

Statement by

Ambassador Michael Biontino
Permanent Representative of Germany to the Conference
on Disarmament

May, 4th , 2015

M r President,

First of all, I would like to align myself with the Statement by the
EU and with the positions of the NPDI regarding the third pillar
of the NPT.
All States Parties to the NPT have the inalienable right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with their
international obligations under Articles I, II and III of the NPT.
Germany reiterates its willingness to cooperate with States that
meet their nuclear non-proliferation obligations and wish to
develop a peaceful civil nuclear programme with full
transparency that meets the highest standards of safety,
security, non-proliferation and respect for the environment.

We also affirm our support for the IAEA's Technical
Cooperation Programme and Peaceful Uses Initiative as an
effective means to promote the benefits of nuclear technology
in areas such as human health, agriculture, water management
and industrial applications, as well as energy to meet the
development needs of IAEA Member States.

In line with Action 46 of the 2010 Action Plan, Germany also
continues to support the IAEA's Technical Cooperation
programme. Capacity-building activities focusing on the safe
and effective use of peaceful applications of nuclear energy and
nuclear technologies are essential tasks, particularly for
countries planning to launch a nuclear power programme.
Consequently, in 2014 Germany contributed 4.76 million euros
to the Technical Cooperation Fund.

Furthermore, we believe that the IAEA's efforts to ensure the
continued high-quality of the work of the nuclear applications
laboratories in Vienna/Seibersdorf are of the utmost importance
in overcoming current and future needs and challenges in such
vital fields as food security and safety, climate change, cancer,
environmental monitoring and emergency response. Tasks
include research and development, training and the provision of
analytical services. In 2014 Germany supported the
modernisation of the Agency's Laboratories at Seibersdorf - the
so-called ReNuAL project - with an extra budgetary contribution
of ca. 1.6 million euros including one Junior Professional Officer.
I am pleased to announce that the German Government is
seriously considering a further voluntary contribution in 2015 to
lend additional support to this project.

Ladies and gentlemen,

The tragic Fukushima accident served as a stern reminder of
the risks associated with nuclear technology. This Conference
should thus urge all States to support the implementation of the
IAEA's Action Plan on Nuclear Safety. It should also welcome
the progress made on promoting the implementation of the
Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS), including the February
2015 Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety by CNS Contracting
Parties. It should emphasise the importance of establishing,
implementing and continuously improving national emergency
preparedness and response measures.

Nuclear energy programmes profit from multilateral approaches
to the nuclear fuel cycle. Germany actively supports this
concept, since it can benefit energy security and nonproliferation without distorting the existing well-functioning
market. We support the IAEA's work to establish a bank of LowEnriched Uranium (LEU) in Kazakhstan and urge the conclusion
of a Host State Agreement at an early date.

Ladies and gentlemen,
Several delegations have mentioned the need for this
Conference also to deal with the right of withdrawal under
Article X of the NPT. Germany supports this view.
Germany acknowledges the right of withdrawal enshrined in
Article X of the NPT. This notwithstanding, the Review
Conference should also clarify the importance of preventing the
abuse of withdrawal. We welcome the constructive proposals
that have been made in this regard.
Furthermore, let me underline our firm view that the right of
withdrawal pursuant to Article X may be exercised only in the
case of extraordinary events related to the subject matter of the
NPT and that the withdrawing State party must give notice of
such withdrawal to all other States parties to the treaty and to
the Security Council three months in advance, stating the
extraordinary events which the withdrawing State party regards
as having jeopardised its supreme interests.
In any event, the right of withdrawal is governed by the
provisions of the NPT and other relevant international legislation
such as the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Under
international law, a withdrawing State party is still liable for
violations of the Treaty perpetrated prior to the notification of
withdrawal.

To be quite clear: Withdrawal does not affect any right,
obligation or legal situation between the withdrawing State party
and each of the other States parties created by the
implementation of the NPT prior to withdrawal, including those
related to IAEA safeguards. Consequently, nuclear materials,
equipment and technology acquired by a State party under
Article IV prior to withdrawal must remain under IAEA
safeguards or fall-back safeguards even after withdrawal.
Germany encourages nuclear supplying States parties to
exercise their sovereign right to incorporate dismantling or
return clauses or fall-back safeguards in the event of withdrawal
into contracts and any other arrangements concluded with other
States parties.
Thank you!

