Mr Chairman,
Greece aligns itself with the statement made earlier by the EU.
As we have already indicated in our general statement, Greece is a
signatory and a strong proponent of the NPT and supports the
universalisation of the Treaty.
In my national capacity I would like to make a statement
regarding nuclear safety and security, elements which fall under the 3rd
Pillar of the NPT on the right for peaceful use of nuclear technology.
In this context, I would like to underline the particular emphasis
that we place on nuclear safety and security. We consider these two
areas as intertwined components when it comes to peaceful use of
nuclear technology.
Both nuclear safety and security are global challenges. We would
like to point out however that national efforts for, inter alia, enhanced
regional cooperation, should be transparent and in full compliance with
the highest international nuclear safety standards as well as the
relevant nuclear security guidelines developed by the IAEA.
As Secretary General Ban Ki Moon has stated at the High Level
Meeting on Nuclear Safety and Security “the effects of nuclear
accidents respect no borders”. We believe that special attention
should be attached to the protection of people and the environment
from ionizing radiation released by accident or human intention.
In this spirit, Greece has signed and ratified the Convention on
Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel, the
Convention of Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and the Protocol
for the Amendment of the Convention for the Liability in the Sector of
Nuclear Energy.

1

The impact that the establishment of a nuclear plant could have
on the environment and the natural habitat of a region, lead Greece to
sign in 1991 and to ratify in 1998 the Convention on Environmental
Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context (ESPOO). The
transboundary component of nuclear facilities must be incorporated in
existing or new nuclear energy operational practice.
Mr Chairman,
In the first semester of 2014 during the Greek presidency of the
Council of the EU, we worked copiously towards reaching an agreement
among EU member states on amending the European Directive on
Nuclear Safety (2009/71/EURATOM). The amended Council Directive
No 2014/87/Euratom was eventually adopted on 8 July 2014. It aims at
further reinforcing the nuclear safety and security framework in the EU
through five principal means: a) strengthening regulatory authorities,
b) preventing accidents/avoiding radioactive releases, c) setting up
peer reviews on specific safety issues, d) increasing transparency/
informing and involving the public, and e) promoting an effective
nuclear safety culture.
The above national amendments are in line with our belief that
nuclear power production worldwide should be in compliance with the
highest international safety and security standards. This is of particular
importance to Greece as one of the main tectonic rifts is located in the
region of the Eastern Mediterranean and has been the cause for
major seismic activity.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear power can never be absolutely safe. For Greece, it has
never been an option as a component of our energy mix. However,
given the regional interest in nuclear power, we would like to reiterate
2

our strong conviction that nuclear safety and security should be a
priority.
We should therefore approach all nuclear technology
developments related to energy production, in a comprehensive
manner by taking all necessary measures in order to guarantee Nuclear
Safety, Nuclear Security and Non-proliferation.
Thank you.

3

