Statement by Ambassador Dr. György Molnár
Director General for Security Policy and Non-proliferation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hungary
Third Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
State Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster III Issues
May 5, 2014

Mr Chairman,
Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement of the European Union. I would only like to add
a few brief remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset let me emphasise that Hungary, a country with an expanding peaceful nuclear
program, acknowledges the right of all states to benefit from the peaceful use of nuclear
energy, provided that adherence to and compliance with NPT non-proliferation and
verification requirements are upheld.
Mr. Chairman,
In our view, it is essential to create synergies between the interlinked areas of nuclear safety
and security. We were therefore particularly honoured that the Hungarian Foreign Minister
had been requested to preside over the International Conference on Nuclear Security:
Enhancing Global Efforts organised by the IAEA in Vienna last July. The Ministerial
Declaration adopted by consensus by all Member States of the IAEA has been an important
milestone in enhancing nuclear security worldwide. The discussions among the nuclear
security experts have also underlined that the IAEA should play a central role in strengthening
the global nuclear security framework.
Although the responsibility of establishing, implementing, maintaining and sustaining a
nuclear security regime rests entirely with states, as it has also been recognised by the Nuclear
Security Summit held earlier this year in The Hague, in our globalized world, no state can
ensure effective nuclear security on its own. Hence international cooperation in this field has
also become indispensable. While recognizing the value of inclusive global partnerships, we
are convinced that different international initiatives can make a very important contribution to
the enhancement of nuclear security.
Mr. Chairman,
In November 2013, Hungary became a Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) free country after
having transferred the remaining spent highly enriched uranium fuel from the Budapest
Research Reactor to the Russian Federation financed by the US Government through the
Global Threat Reduction Initiative (GTRI). Hungary became the ninth nation, to have
completely removed all HEU fuel from its territory. We encourage all countries concerned to
work towards the elimination of all HEU from their territories.

The Hungarian Atomic Energy has concluded a cooperation agreement with the IAEA Office
of Nuclear Security in the field of nuclear security for organizing regional training activities,
fostering research and development, as well as the implementation of advanced techniques
and procedures. As another contribution to strengthening nuclear security, Hungary will host
an event of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT) on national forensics
libraries in Budapest, in the fall of 2014.
Mr Chairman,
The second International Physical Protection Advisory Service (IPPAS) mission of the IAEA
took place in Hungary in May last year, with a very thorough examination of the country’s
entire nuclear security regime. The IPPAS team concluded that the physical protection
systems at the visited sites had been significantly enhanced. We were delighted that the team
also identified 13 good practices in our national nuclear security regime. In order to
implement the suggestions and recommendations of the IPPAS mission, a national action plan
was developed by the end of 2013.
Hungary applies the IAEA safety standards, which provide a complex system of fundamental
principles, requirements and guides for guaranteeing nuclear safety. We have a keen interest
in ensuring that all actors maintain or work towards the highest possible standards in all
aspects of nuclear energy. These high standards, which we are fully committed to, can only be
maintained by ensuring the highest level of nuclear safety worldwide.
We believe that highly professional staffs of maintenance and operation experts at all levels
are a key to the safe and reliable operation of nuclear power plants. We are therefore ready to
provide assistance and cooperate with interested partners. As an effort to contribute to the
generally recognised goal of strengthening nuclear security worldwide we continue to
organize practical training courses at the Paks Maintenance and Training Centre.

