Statement by Ambassador Dr. Gyorgy Molnar
Director General for Security Policy and Non-Proliferation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hungary
First Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of
the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons
Cluster I11 issues
May 9,2012

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset let me recall that Hungary associates itself with the statement of the EU, and
with the relevant working papers of the Vienna Group of 10.
Mr. Chairman,
Hungary acknowledges the right of all states for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We put
special emphasis on the third part of the Action Plan adopted at the previous Review
Conference, and recognize the importance of this topic which addresses the safe and secure
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as well as technical co-operation
programmes of the IAEA.
Hungary attaches great importance to the safe use of nuclear energy and we are committed to
the worldwide achievement of the highest standards of nuclear safety. Accordingly, Hungary
has completed the safety assessment of the Paks Nuclear Power Plant as required by the EU
"stress-test'' process.
The report stated that no immediate action was required however, it identified areas where the
safety of the Paks NPP can be further enhanced. We are proud that international experts
processing our National Report acclaimed the methodology of the self-assessment and the
results presented in it.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear safety and security are mutually reinforcing each other, and thus should be regulated
in a synergetic manner. We are convinced that the IAEA plays a central role in this regard,
and we fully support the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources.

Mr. Chairman,
As a country with an active peaceful nuclear program and plans to further expand its related
capacities, Hungary has a keen interest in ensuring the security of its nuclear facilities and
material, and in mitigating the risks of nuclear terrorism.
Hungary fully complies with Action 59: we have ratified all conventions related to nuclear
safety and also the Amendment of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. As required, Hungary has implemented the necessary reforin of the legal and
regulatory framework of the physical protection of nuclear facilities, nuclear and other
radioactive material.
Hungary shares the view that appropriately addressing the issue of fissile material for nuclear
weapon purposes could make an important contribution to enhancing international and
regional security. We stress that the Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty should be the next
multilateral instrument to be negotiated in this field.
We understand the potential harm that Highly Enriched Uranium can cause if it gets into
wrong hands. In line with Action 61 Hungary has taken a leading role in minimizing and
eventually eliminating its stocks of Highly Enriched Uranium used at civilian facilities. As
part of the Global Threat Reduction Initiative and the Russian Research Reactor Fuel Return
program, the majority of the spent fuel from the Budapest Research Reactor was successfully
repatriated to Russia, with core conversion to be completed in a few years.
Hungary, as a country committed to nuclear security, in collaboration with the IAEA has
offered training courses that would provide both theoretical and on-site activities in the field
of physical protection. In cooperation with the Vienna office of UNODA we have recently
organized a seminar focusing on CBN security that also aimed at assessing the results of the
Seoul Nuclear Security Summit.
Mr. Chairman,
Hungary reaffirms its full commitment to an effective and efficient technical co-operation
program. As a member of the Board of Governors of the IAEA and in line with Actions 52,
53 and 54 Hungary has emphasized the importance of international development and last year
pledged an extra-budgetary contribution of 60,000 Euros for the Peaceful Uses Initiative with
the intention to support water related projects in developing countries. Hungary believes this
to be a crucial topic worthy of even more attention and we are satisfied to see a great ~iumber
of TC projects supporting this cause.
Finally, Mr Chairman,
As announced at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul Hungary has pledged to share with
interested partners its experience and know-how in the area of Nuclear Power Plant
maintenance within the framework of Technical Cooperation. The Hungarian nuclear power
plant has a highly sophisticated maintenance training centre with real equipment established
with the help of the Agency where nuclear experts can be trained without the risk of radiation.
We look forward to working there together with interested countries.
Thank you, Mr. Chainnan

