
Mr. Chairman,
My delegation associates itself with the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement States Parties to the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia has long been a strong advocate of promoting nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. For its part, Indonesia has carried out its activities with the IAEA in furthering the application of nuclear science and technology with a view to promoting the quality of life, particularly of the people in the developing countries. My delegation recognizes the long-standing objective and growing role of the IAEA in advancing human progress through nuclear applications, promoting socio-economic development and maintaining world peace and security. We also recognize the role played by the Agency in promoting nuclear technology for peaceful purposes under the three pillars of its mandate, including through technical cooperation.
We are pleased to learn that the IAEA has placed more emphasis on the role of nuclear energy for development, and contributes to meeting the world's growing demand for energy as well as other applications for human welfare. We continue to witness the rising expectations for nuclear energy in different parts of the world, especially for generating electricity. As a country with more than 200 million people and bearing in mind the current situation of energy resources, Indonesia has opted to use nuclear energy as one of its primary energy resources to meet its rising demand for energy in the future.
Mr. Chairman,
Indonesia fully recognizes the inalienable right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as clearly preserved in Article IV of the NPT. We are of the view that Article IV is part of a "political bargain" within the NPT context. In return of NNWS to forego their options to acquire nuclear weapons, NWS promised to work towards nuclear disarmament and all States party to cooperate in the further development of nuclear energy.
In the context of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, however, we have increasingly observes some growing imbalance approaches on the implementation of Article IV of the NPT, among others:
•	the imposition of restrictions on the supply of materials, equipment and technology by some nuclear supplier states which have backed away from their original guarantee to facilitate the fullest possible exchange or the further development of the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
•	a tendency of putting more obligations to NNWS in their efforts to acquire nuclear energy for peaceful purposes by putting additional constraints on Article IV, for example, to make AP as a condition for peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which cause voluntary undertakings under the IAEA safeguards agreements or AP are turned into legal obligations;
At the same time, there is an increasing demand of energy which has generated the need to use of nuclear energy, and in turn, has caused a significant demand on nuclear fuel cycle and a reliable nuclear fuel supply. Therefore, State parties which actually have always been compliant to the NPT, especially the NNWS, may be compelled to seek alternative sources of energy, Including nuclear energy;
Mr. Chairman,
The provision of Article IV of the NPT, which was specifically crafted to preclude any attempt to reinterpret the NPT that fully recognized the right of each State party to develop nuclear energy. As long as it is aimed and used not to produce nuclear weapons and under the full comprehensive safeguards and AP of the IAEA, the right should be fully respected by all States parties without any interference.
However, developing nuclear energy requires a reliable nuclear fuel cycle mechanism. In reality, the existing fuel cycle mechanism is a market based system controlled by the Nuclear Supplier Group (NSG) as a group of states that have the capability to provide nuclear material, equipment and technology. In recent years, attempts to develop a multilateral fuel cycle have also been too much influenced by business interests of the industry and strategic interests of nuclear capable states.
Mr. Chairman,
As far as the assurances of nuclear fuel supply are concerned, we take note of the call for the development of a multilateral approach for the assurance of the nuclear fuel supply to strengthen non-proliferation and cope with the expected expansion of the use of nuclear power, and of the proposals that have been put forward on this matter. Some might argue that multilateral approaches point to the loss or limitation of State sovereignty and independent ownership and control over nuclear technology, leaving unfairly the commercial benefits of such technology to only to a few countries. Others might argue that multilateral approaches could lead to further dissemination of or loss of control over sensitive nuclear technologies which may result in wider proliferation risks.
Indonesia is of the view that the creation of multilateral fuel cycle arrangement, which among others would guarantee the security of nuclear fuel supply, is a complementary mechanism for strengthening the existing non-proliferation regime. The objectives and efforts to establish such arrangement should not terminate or restrict the right to develop nuclear technology, including sensitive technology.
In this context, Indonesia would like to underline that prior to the establishment of multilateral fuel cycle arrangement, the following conditions should be met:
•	the process should be conducted in a non-discriminatory, multilaterally-negotiated, comprehensive and transparent manner under the auspices of the IAEA;
•	taking into account technical aspects associated with such arrangement, the role and involvement of the IAEA should be clear from the very beginning;
•	a recommitment of full implementation of nuclear disarmament obligations by NWS in a transparent, comprehensive and verifiable manner;
•	negotiation of a verifiable FMCT should be commenced as soon as possible, taking into account that FMCT would terminate the right of NWS and non-NPT states to build weapons grade;
•	a mechanism needs to be established to deal with three non-NPT States parties as de-facto nuclear capable states.
Thank you Mr. Chairman for your attention.