Mr. Chairman
I would like to start by associating with the positions already expressed by the distinguished representative of Malaysia on behalf of Non-Aligned Movement.
1.	To establish a balance between security concerns and the socio-economic requirements for development especially for the developing countries, Article IV of the Treaty guarantees "the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty" and provides for an undertaking by all parties to the Treaty "to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peacefid uses of nuclear energy". This Article also plays a crucial role as the main incentive set forth to encourage non-nuclear weapon states to join the Treaty and thereby foster the non-proliferation regime.
2.	Article III, while providing for the undertaking by each non-nuclear weapon states to conclude safeguard agreements with the IAEA, is equally explicit in articulating that the implementation of such safeguards shall be "in a manner designed to comply with Article IV of this Treaty, and to avoid hampering the economic or technological development of the Parties or international co-operation in the field of peacef ul nuclear activities, including the international exchange of nuclear material and equipment for the processing".
3.	This notion was duly taken note of in the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference considering that "the strengthening of IAEA safeguards should not adversely aff ect the resources available for technical assistance and cooperation. The allocation of resources should take into account all of the Agency's statutory functions, including that of encouraging and assisting the development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses with adequate technology transf er. "
4.	Given the importance of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and nuclear technologies in human health, agriculture and environmental protection and in sustainable economic development, especially in the developing countries, the statute of the International Atomic Energy
Agency recognizes its role in encouraging and assisting "research on, and development and practical application of, atomic energy for peaceful uses throughout the world" and fostering "the exchange of scientific and technical information on peaceful uses of atomic energy".
5.	In recent years, the fundamental role of the IAEA is increasingly-recognized in the promotion of the nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and developing countries parties to the Treaty expect that more financial and human resources should be dedicated to Technical Cooperation Fund of the Agency to discharge effectively its responsibilities.
6.	Measures taken by all states parties to prevent nuclear proliferation should facilitate rather than hamper the exercise of the recognized rights of the developing countries parties to the Treaty for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. The restrictions on the transfers of nuclear materials, equipment and technologies for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should be swiftly removed.
7.	Bilateral and multilateral cooperation among states parties to the Treat}7, under the supervision of the IAEA, in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should never be restricted or confined either by other states or ad hoc export control regimes.
8.	Measures need to be taken to ensure that the inalienable rights of all states parties under the provisions of the preamble and articles of the Treaty are all fully protected and that no state party should be limited in exercising its rights under the treaty based on allegations of non-compliance which are not substantiated by the IAEA.
9.	Undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes is a source of serious concern. As emphasizes by the NAM Heads of State or Government proliferation concerns are best addressed through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory agreements. Non-proliferation control arrangements should be transparent and open to participation by all States, and should ensure that they do not impose restrictions on access to material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes required by developing countries for their sustainable development. In this regard any attempt to use the International Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) technical co-operation programme as a tool for political purposes in violation of the IAEA's Statute, is totally rejected.
10.	The application of unilaterally enforced export control regimes in contravention of the letter and the spirit of the Treaty has hampered the access of the developing countries to nuclear materials, equipment and technologies for peaceful purposes. The PrepComs and the NPT 2005
Review Conference should intensify their work in order to promote the implementation of the inalienable rights of all states parties, particularly the developing countries, to enjoy unrestricted access to nuclear materials, technologies, equipment and scientific and technological information for peaceful purposes.
11. Before concluding, 1 would like to briefly react to the statement by the representative of the United States, where she again repeated allegations already raised 39 times in her delegation's statement in general debate. There might not be any need to recall that repetition of allegations do not add any credit to the claim. I would like to ask the US delegation just to name only one case where the United States has contributed to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in the Islamic Republic of Iran and this contribution has been used as a cover for the so called clandestine military purposes. On the other hand we can give lists of US interference and barring other nations' cooperation in contravention of Article IV of the NPT. I would like to recall that Iran's case is under consideration in the IAEA. So far none of the Resolutions by the Board of Governors has confirmed US claims of non-compliance by the Islamic Republic of Iran and I hope the US delegation would have the courage to acknowledge when it finds itself to be wrong.