—-Please check against delivery

--

Statement by FEE, Mr. Reza Najafi
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to the United Nations and other International Organizations Vienna
On Other Provisions of the Treaty
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, 10 1ay 2017
-

In the Name of God, the Mast Compassionate, the Most Merciful.
lr. Chairman,
I associate mx delegation with the NAM statement delivered by Indonesia.
Realization of the universality of the Treaty should remain one of our main priorities. It is
essential Par ensuring the effectiveness of the Treaty. Even if all provisions of the NPT are
fully implemented, its failure in achieving universality would seriously undermine its object
and purpose.

For that reason, the 1995 Review and Extension Conference established that universal
adherence to the Treaty is an urgent priority. Likewise, it decided that Review Conferences
should address specifically what might be done to achieve the universal itv of the Treaty.
Mv delegation highlights that. in the 1995 decision on principles and objectives, all States
parties have undertaken to make every eflhrt to achieve the universal adherence to the Treaty.
This commitment reaffirmed in the final documents of the 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences. In those documents. all States parties undertook to make determined efforts
towards the achievement of universality of the Treaty and refrain from any action that can
negatively affect prospects for the universality of the Treaty.

Unfortunately, disturbing developments have taken place in violation of the Treaty and the
afore-mentioned undertaking. One example of which is the NSG decision that has rendered
the universality of the Treaty less attainable. Indeed, when non-parties to the Treaty freely
receive nuclear cooperation, by any measure, they never see any advantage in adhering
thereto.
Another example of violation of such obligations and commitments to achieve universality of
the Treaty can be seen in the Middle East, where the only non-party to the NPT continues to
receive scientific and technological assistance for its unsafeguarded nuclear activities and
unwarranted facilities at which it produces the plutonium for its underground nuclear
weapons program.
Accordingly. the Islamic Republic of Iran calls on the 2020 Review Conference to address
this issue. The Conference is urged, in addition to making a decision on complete prohibition
of transfer of nuclear equipment, material and technology to non-parties to the Treaty, make
specific decisions to promote the universality of the NPT.
To that end. Iran recommends Review Conference to recognize that non-adherence to the
NPT undermines its objectives, and thus pose a threat to international peace and security; to
urge the non-parties to accede, promptly. unconditionally and as non-nuclear-weapon parties
to the NPT; to recognize that unsafeguarded nuclear facilities of the non-parties to the Treaty
and providing nuclear cooperation and assistance to them by certain nuclear-weapon States
threaten the peace and security, in particular in the Middle Fast: to reaffirm the commitment

of all States parties to cease and prohibit completely the transfer or sharing of any nuclear
related equipment, information, material, facilities, resources or devices, or the extension of
scientific and technical assistance in the nuclear field to nonparties to the treaty without
exception.
r. Chairman,
On article X of the Treaty, and contrary to some arguments, in our view, there is neither
necessity nor urgency to focus on this issue. The Review Conferences and its Preparatory
Committee have more important priorities and challenges to deal with, such as those
emanating from nonimplementation of the disarmament obligations, the development and
modernization of the nuclear weapons. nuclear sharing and the postures and doctrines that
allow and iustili the use of such inhumane weapons in certain circumstances.
Right to withdrawal is a sovereign right and explicitly reaffirmed in article X. Any proposal
regarding this article that goes beyond its provisions or aimed at limiting or conditioning this
sovereign right is unacceptable.
The text of article X leaves the determination of the existence of the extraordinary events
completely to the discretion of the withdrawing State. Therefore, it leaves no room for
reinterpretation. For that reason, we wish to stress that any proposal aimed at reinterpreting
articles of the NPT is tantamount to amending the Treaty, Thus. any such proposal shall be
considered an amendment to the Treaty, and consequently, must follow the procedures
stipulated in its article VIII.

In conclusion, Iran reiterates that the main challenge facing the Treaty is the lack of progress
on fulfilling, by the nuclearweapon States. of their obligations on nuclear disarmament and
their unequivocal undertakings for the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals. Other
challenges include the continued existence of thousands of nuclear warheads and their
development and modernization as well as the policies and doctrines justifying their threat or
use. Therefore, we urge the Review Conference to focus on these issues.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

