IRELAND
Cluster 3

Statement by
Ambassador Tom Hanney
Head of Delegation

at the

2017 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

Vienna, 10 May 2017

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF IRELAND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS IN VIENNA
ROTENTURMSTRASSE 16-18, A1010 VIENNA

Mr Chairman,
I wish to associate my remarks with those of the European Union, the New
Agenda Coalition and the Vienna Group of 10, as well as with the Working Paper
presented by the group of Coastal and Shipping States. (I will deliver a shortened
text and the full version will be lodged and available online.)

Ireland believes strongly in an international order, based on the rule of law, and
we are committed to effective multilateralism as the best way of achieving and
upholding the rule of law, thereby ensuring international peace and security and
advancing international cooperation. Consistent with this approach, we are fully
committed to working with our partners in the international community,
including here in Vienna with the IAEA, in making progress on the three pillars
of the NPT – disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear
technologies. It is our considered view, as stated earlier in this Prep Com, that
we must not permit any further continuation of the unbalanced situation, in
which we continue to record steady progress under the non-proliferation and
peaceful uses pillars of the NPT, while progress under the disarmament pillar
remains disappointingly limited.

We welcome the Ministerial Declaration agreed by consensus at the
International Conference on Nuclear Security in December 2016, which
recognised that nuclear security contributes to international peace and security
and which stressed that nuclear disarmament is critically needed. Bearing in
mind the considerable risks which have been discussed here, and which we have
raised in both our National and NAC statements and Working Papers, we would,
however, have wished for this statement to go further and have an explicit
recognition of the clear link between nuclear security and nuclear disarmament.

The fact that only a limited proportion of fissionable material worldwide is used
for civilian purposes speaks for itself.

In this regard, I would like to draw attention to the important and timely report
prepared by UNIDIR, and other experts including Chatham House, on
“Understanding Nuclear Weapons Risk”, including the lessons drawn from the
assessment of nuclear power plant risks, as well as the threat posed by nonstate actors and potential cyber-attacks. These issues have been raised by many
delegations here. We do need to open a conversation about the whole risk
equation and the pertinent variables, both natural and intentional, which are
linked to a potential nuclear weapons detonation. We agree with the Report’s
authors that these related risk and security issues are ones on which Nuclear
Weapons States and Non-Nuclear Weapons States should engage.

The IAEA has been a strong resource for States in the area of nuclear security
over many decades, with a proud record of providing support and expert advice.
In his opening address to this Prep Com, DG Amano outlined some of the ongoing practical support mechanisms which the Agency provides to States. These
range from the key security instrument, the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM), to the on the ground training of police
and border guards. Ireland will continue to support the DG and the Agency in
this vital work. In particular, I wish to express our appreciation for the IAEA’s
work, and the leadership of Director General Amano, in promoting adherence
to the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, which Ireland ratified in 2016. Implementation of the amended
Convention will help to reduce the risk of a terrorist attack involving nuclear
material which would have catastrophic consequences.

For many years, the IAEA has promoted greater communication in the area of
maritime transport of radioactive material primarily through supporting
dialogue between coastal and shipping states. As an island state, this area is of
particular interest to Ireland and is coherent with the Agency’s pro-active
approach to addressing the threats posed by illicit trafficking in nuclear material.
We are fully committed to this process of dialogue between interested Coastal
and Shipping States, with the common objectives of deepening trust between
partners, while preserving and, indeed, enhancing the security of these
transports. We also look forward to participating in the planned table top
exercise (TTX) in Lisbon in June of this year, and would like to thank the Chair of
the Dialogue, our colleague the Ambassador of Portugal, for his excellent work
in this area. We fully support the new Working Paper submitted to this
Preparatory Committee by the countries participating in the Informal Dialogue.

I also wish to acknowledge Director General Amano’s personal commitment to
the promotion of nuclear science and technology in supporting sustainable
development, in particular in improving access to effective cancer treatment in
developing countries. The IAEA’s Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, or
PACT, helps countries devise comprehensive cancer control programmes. The
third of the seventeen Sustainable Development Goals aims by 2030 to ensure
healthy lives and promote well being for all at all ages. This is a huge challenge
which relates directly to the work of the PACT. With its long history of working
for peaceful applications of nuclear technologies, the IAEA is well placed to guide
and support its Member States to a healthy and productive future. Ireland plans
to enter into further discussions with the IAEA in support of the PACT
programme. We will participate in the forthcoming International Conference on

the IAEA Technical Cooperation Conference where we will place particular
emphasis on the importance of the PACT programme.

Ireland fully recognises and respects the sovereign right of every state to
develop nuclear technologies for the generation of energy and other peaceful
uses, in accordance with Article IV of the NPT. While Ireland maintains a policy
of not using nuclear energy for the generation of electricity, we are conscious
of, and greatly value, the societal benefits from the peaceful uses of nuclear
technologies. We are, however, also conscious of the risks which may be
associated with nuclear power and technologies - risks which have increased
dramatically in recent years. If countries choose to use nuclear power then it is
essential that it is used safely and securely. We continue to attach the utmost
importance to the worldwide implementation and continuous improvement of
nuclear safety and we greatly appreciate the crucial role played by the IAEA in
this regard.

Thank You.

ENDS

