IRELAND
Cluster III
Statement by
Ambassador Tom Hanney
Permanent Representative of Ireland to the International
Organisations in Vienna
At the
2018 Preparatory Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Geneva, 1 May, 2018

Check against Delivery

Mr Chairman

My delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered within this Cluster
by the European Union and the Vienna Group of 10. We would like to add
the following brief comments in a national capacity.

Ireland believes strongly in an international order, based on the rule of law,
and we are committed to effective multilateralism as the best way of
achieving and upholding the rule of law, thereby ensuring international
peace and security and advancing international cooperation. Consistent
with this approach, we are fully committed to working with our partners in
the international community, including with the IAEA, in making progress
on the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) – disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear technologies. Ireland views the three pillars as being
interdependent and mutually reinforcing.
While Ireland has chosen not to include nuclear power in its energy mix,
we nevertheless recognise the right of all State Parties to the NPT to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes under Article IV of the Treaty. As a
strong advocate of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Ireland
recognises that it is only through equal implementation of each of the three
pillars of the NPT that our shared objective of a world free of nuclear
weapons will be realised. As the 2010 Review Conference noted, the NPT
provides a framework of international confidence and cooperation within
which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can take place. This framework
is not just confined to Article IV, but applies to all of the three pillars,
which must be implemented in their entirety.

Ireland emphasises the importance of promoting the equal, full and
effective participation of both women and men in nuclear nonproliferation, nuclear disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
We are an active member of the Vienna-based GFWIN/Group of Friends
of Women in Nuclear, which is growing and now represents 23 Member
States.

Ireland is convinced that achieving gender parity is not just a

women’s issue, but an issue closely linked to overall effectiveness.
Mr Chairman
While Ireland maintains a policy of not using nuclear energy for the
generation of electricity, we are conscious of, and greatly value, the
societal benefits from the peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. The
application of nuclear technologies can and do make very positive
contributions in the areas of health, water management, agriculture, food
safety and nutrition, energy and more broadly to the achievement of UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Ireland continues to be strong supporters of the IAEA's Technical
Cooperation Programme, including through the Technical Cooperation
Fund and the Peaceful Uses Initiative. We strongly support the activities
of the Agency to develop radiation and nuclear related science and
technologies and to promote their application in the service of the SDGs.
Ireland welcomes the upcoming IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear
Science and Technology to be held in Vienna in November this year. We
think this conference offers an important opportunity to highlight the
contribution of nuclear technologies and their applications to attaining the
SDGs.

I also wish to acknowledge Director General Amano’s personal
commitment to the promotion of nuclear science and technology in
supporting sustainable development, in particular in improving access to
effective cancer treatment in developing countries. Ireland has made
financial contributions in support of the PACT programme in previous
years, and we are examining the potential of supporting the work of PACT
again this year.
The IAEA’s Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, or PACT, helps
countries devise comprehensive cancer control programmes. The third of
the seventeen Sustainable Development Goals aims by 2030 to ensure
healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages. This is a huge
challenge which relates directly to the work of the PACT. With its long
history of working for peaceful applications of nuclear technologies, the
IAEA is well placed to guide and support its Member States to a healthy
and productive future.
While we recognise the societal benefits that can accrue from the
application of nuclear technologies, we are, however, also conscious of the
risks which may be associated with nuclear power and technologies - risks
which have increased dramatically in recent years. If countries choose to
use nuclear power then it is essential that it is used safely and securely. The
NPT has established a rigorous and successful framework for the transfer
of nuclear power and technologies in support of socio-economic
development.

Mr Chairman,
Ireland believes the successful and responsible application of nuclear
technologies must be based on three crucial underpinnings: safety, security
and safeguards. Nuclear safety and security must remain a fundamental
component of all technical cooperation projects and the strict adherence to
international agreements, norms and guidance, such as those developed
under the auspices of the IAEA are essential for the peaceful use of the
atom.

Ireland strongly believes that further improvement in the

implementation of nuclear safety, security and safeguards when
developing technical co-operation projects can be achieved, and should be
constantly sought. The IAEA is the major player to guarantee that countries
choosing to develop their capacities in the peaceful applications of nuclear
energy do so under the best safety, security and non-proliferation
conditions. We continue to attach the utmost importance to the worldwide
implementation and continuous improvement of nuclear safety and we
greatly appreciate the crucial role played by the IAEA in this regard.
The 2017 IAEA General Conference Resolution on Nuclear Security
(GC(61)/RES/9), and the Ministerial Declaration for the 2016 International
Conference on Nuclear Security provides us with a solid foundation from
which all States can continue this work.
The IAEA has been a strong resource for States in the area of nuclear
security over many decades, with a proud record of providing support and
expert advice. These range from the key security instrument, to Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM), and its
Amendment to the on the ground training of police and border guards.
Ireland will continue to support the Agency in this vital work. For many

years, the IAEA has promoted greater communication in the area of
maritime transport of radioactive material primarily through supporting
dialogue between coastal and shipping states. As an island state, this area
is of particular interest to Ireland and is coherent with the Agency’s proactive approach to addressing the threats posed by illicit trafficking in
nuclear material. We are fully committed to this process of dialogue
between interested Coastal and Shipping States, with the common
objectives of deepening trust between partners, while preserving and,
indeed, enhancing the security of these transports. With our UK
colleagues, Ireland is co-chairing the Coastal and Shipping States Group
in Vienna for the period 2017-2019. Ireland will continue to be committed
to the highest standards of security and safety, both in the transport of
nuclear material and in general.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.

