ITALY
2018 NPT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
CLUSTER III ISSUES

STATEMENT BY
H. E . AMBASSADOR GIANFRANCO INCARNAT O

Ge neva, 23 April -4 May 2018

Check aga inst delivery

1

Mr. Chainnan,
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union . I
wish to add some considerations in my nationa1 capacity .

Peaceful Uses and Technical Cooperation
Atiicle IV of the NPT acknowledges the right of all Parties "to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes" and to benefit from
international cooperation in this area, in conformity with their nonproliferation
obligations. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) plays a key role in
furthering such cooperation, thus also contributing to the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals set by the UN 2030 Agenda.
Italy greatly appreciates the technical assistance and cooperation programs can-ied
out by the Agency and has provided its full contribution to the Technical Cooperation
Fund in 2017, with a share of over 3 million Euros. Additional voluntary
contributions have been granted to projects centered on specific needs of Least
Developed Countries, jointly ca1Tied out by the IAEA and the FAO. A further
specific support in this respect has been recently provided by making available to the
joint IAEA /FAO division an Associate Expert for a period of two years starting next
autumn.
Our comm itment towards technical assistance and peaceful uses is also confirmed by
the large number of scholarships and training programs for citizens of developing
countries organized by the ICTP of Trieste and by numerous Universities and
Research Centres throughout Italy. Among the courses that ICTP offers, I wish to
recall the "Master of Advanced Studies in Medical Physics", a two-year postgraduate course organi zed by the IAEA and the University of Trieste, which trains
"clinical medical physicists" ready to work in their countries of orig in.
Indeed, Italy is working to develop peaceful uses of nuclear technologies and
applications in several fields. We are paiiicularly proud of promoting
the
advancement of nuclear medicine through vai·ious initiatives, such as, recently, the
project for the production of technetium isotopes at the ENEA TRIG A reactor and the
program of studies on Boron Neutron Capture Therapy (BNCT) and on copper
isotope production for theranostics application at the LENA TRIG A Reactor of Pavia
University .
Also in the field of agricultural and animal-health nuclear applications Italy has been
giving a significant contr ibution to international research and development activities .
For instance, the Centro Agricoltura Arnbiente "G. Nicoli" in Bologna ha s been for

2

years an IAEA Collaborating Centre in the development and implementation of a
Sterile Insect Techn ique package for Aedes Mos quitoes suppression.
Finally, my country is actively engage d in furthering research advancements on
fusion and innovative nuclear systems and on methods and technolog ies to strengthen
safety and security with the aim of protect ing both the people and the environment.
Italy indeed believes that any project using nuclear energy, as well as any technology
and application making use of radioactive materials should integrate elements of
safeguards, safety, security, emergency preparedness and response. These are, in fact,
crucia l components for a long-lasting development and for the well-being and
protection of the population.
The IAEA can offer a substantial contribution in this respect.

Peaceful Uses of N uclear Energy and IAEA Safeg uards

By "preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices" as Article III. l of the NPT states, the IAEA' s system
of safeguards - multilateral, impartial, qualified and effective as it is - is one of the
core components of the NPT and a fundamental insurance for our security.
Comprehensive Safeguar ds Agreeme nts together with Additional Protocols represent
the current verification standard. Their universalization must be pursued without
delay, as a means conducive to mutual trust and as a necessary step forwar d towar ds a
purely peaceful use of nuclear energy and applications. The effectiveness of the
safeguards system can be further strengthened through a consistent and universal
application of the State Level Concept, whose development Italy continues to
support.
Against this backdrop, we wish to recall the crucial role that the JCPOA is playing to
ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear program. The
comprehensive verification and monitoring activities carried out by the IAEA,
including through the complementary accesses conducted under the Additional
Protocol, have provided constant evidence of Teheran's compliance with its nuclearrelated commitments . We invite Iran to ratify without delay the Additional Protocol
that it is provisionally applying.

Peaceful Uses of N uclear Energy and Nuclear Safety

3

Following two referenda, Italy decided to abandon its nuclear energy program and is
consequent ly engaged in the decommissioning of its nuclear facilities . The Italian
State company SO.G.I.N. is carrying out the decommissioning in compliance with the
highest international safety and security standards.
The decommissioning of nuclear facilities is a complex process, consisting of many
interrelated activities (such as radiological characterization, decontamination,
dismantling of equipment, facilities and buildings, disposal of radioactive waste and
materials etc.) which require highly developed skills, know-how and technological
specializations so as to guarantee its conformity to the most stringent safety and
security standards.
In order to verify and test the robustness and the technical, economic and time
consistency of the decommissioning program of Italy's nuclear facilities, last year
SO.G.I.N. decided to place its General Program for the decommissioning of the
Italian facilities under an international independent Peer Review by adhering to the
ARTEJ\11ISprogram of the IAEA. The Peer Review concluded its activities in
September 2017 and positively stated that "the cost estimate process was robust .....
and aligns with recognized methodologies; the sequencing and approach to
decommissioning activities were appropriate, .... and techniques and technologies
utilized are proven and well tested" .
Italy is a party to the main international conventions in the field of nuclear safety and
presented its National Report at the 7th Review Meeting of the Convention on
Nuclear Safety (CNS) in 2017 . We participated actively in the review process that
was carried out during the Meeting and strongly supported the implementation of the
principles of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety (VDNS).
Italy is also looking forward to the upcoming 6th review meeting of the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management.
We call on all countries that have or intend to have a nuclear power program to
adhere to the relevant international conventions in the field of nuclear safety.

Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Security

Ensuring the highest levels of nuclear security is a shared interest of the international
community to be pursued both by each State at national level and through
international cooperation. The application of the highest standards of nuclear security
should not be seen as an obstacle but rather as a further contribution to the

4

development of nuclear technologies and applications with the aim of guaranteeing
and promoting their legitimate use for exclusively peaceful purpose s.
Having actively participated in the high- level political dialogue of the Nuclear
Security Summits, Italy has shown its commitment towards promoting nuclear
security culture, by financing, through voluntary extra-budgetary contributions to the
IAEA's Nuclear Security Fund, the Joint ICTP-IAE A International School on
Nuclear Security, which takes place once a year at the Inter national Center for
Theoretical Physics in Trieste. The School completed 8 years of activity, has trained
so far more than 500 young professionals from developing countries and serves as a
model for IAEA regional schools.
After the 20 16 Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, Italy has joined the Nuclear
Security Contact Group (NSCG) and actively participates in its work. We encourage
those States that have not already done so to join the Nuclear Securi ty Contact Group
as it can contribute to focus engagement within the IAEA. We strongly support the
central role of the IAEA in the globa l nuclear security framework and we enco urage
all States to fulfill their nuclear security responsibilities.
Italy takes also part in the Global Init iative to Combat Nuclear Te1Torism (GICNT)
and in other re levant international and European initiatives , also wit hin the broader
scope of CBRNE.
Italy has ratified the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and the Internat ional Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Te1Torism (ICSANT) and urges those States that have not yet done
so to ratify both Conventions. The implementation of these instruments is as
important as their universali zation. The IAEA should play a leadership role in both
regards, contributing to building capacity in the States that need it the most.

Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your attention.

5

