Second session ofthe Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons
ITALY'S STATEMENT UNDER CLUSTER 3
Italy associates fully with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the EU.
I wish to add a few remarks from a national point of view.
First, peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be responsible uses, as the
exercise of any right is always accompanied by responsibilities and
obligations and this is true. also of the right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes foreseen by
article IV of the NPT.
To this end, strengthening the IAEA is key. Italy is the 6th contributor to the
Agency's regular budget and actively supports it also through financial
contributions to the Nuclear Security Fund and to the Technical
Cooperation Fund.
As regards nuclear security, noting the importance of the timely removal
and disposition of nuclear materials from facilities no longer using them,
Italy is working with the United States to eliminate HEU and Plutonium
from its territory. Work is being carried out in the framework of the
"Global Threat Reduction Initiative" in view of the repatriation to the U.S.
of the non-utilized materials, in connection with the Nuclear Security
Summit Process.
Since the Italian G8 presidency in 2009, Italy places special emphasis on
education, training and institutional capacity building as important
elements of an effective nuclear security culture. As announced at the
Nuclear Security Summit in Washington in 2010, we have launched, in
cooperation with the IAEA, an "International Nuclear Security School"
running at the International Center for Theoretical PhYSics in Trieste in
North Eastern Italy. The third edition of the School has just taken place In
April with very good attendance. It enables young professionals, in
particular from developing countries, to acquire relevant knowledge
needed to improve national nuclear security, thus contributing to the
responsible exercise of the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Thank you for your kind attention.

