Mr. Chairman,
Since this is the first time I have asked for the floor under your Presidency, may I begin by congratulating you for your assumption of this important task, for which I express my best wishes. Let me assure you of my delegation's support in the difficult job you have undertaken.
In response to the decision taken by the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference to improve transparency in nuclear related export controls within a framework of dialogue and co-operation among all interested States party to the Treaty (Principle 17 of the "Principles and Objectives"), the NSG has taken a number of steps to increase transparency in its activities.
The first step was the creation, in 1997, of a collective paper on the origins, role, structure and activities of the NSG. In the interest of maximizing the distribution, the NSG members requested that it be circulated to all IAEA member states as an Information Circular (INFCIRC/539). The collective paper explains that the NSG Guidelines aim to ensure that nuclear trade for peaceful purposes does not contribute to proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices without hindering international trade and cooperation in the nuclear field.
The implementation of the Guidelines underpins the development of trade in this area by providing means whereby obligations to facilitate peaceful nuclear cooperation can be implemented in a manner consistent with international nuclear non-proliferation norms. The NSG Guidelines are thus consistent with, and complement, the various international legally binding instruments in the field of nuclear non-proliferation, notably the NPT.
The second step was the organization of an International Seminar on the "Role of Export Controls in Nuclear Non- Proliferation" in Vienna in October 1997, chaired by Mr. Abdul Minty, South African Governor to the IAEA. All members of the U.N. as well as experts from international organizations and academic and industry specialists were invited. It included keynote speeches and commentaries by leading figures and senior experts in nuclear non- proliferation and export controls from all over the world. With four individual sessions, spread over two days, the Seminar covered a wide range of issues relating to the topic. Each session provided for questions and answers, and the seminar was concluded by a panel discussion.
5. The keynote address for the first session on The international nuclear non-proliferation regime was made by Dr. Hans Blix, at that time still Director-General of the IAEA. Comments were made by Dr. Fritz Schmidt, chairman of the Zangger Committee and Dr. Rama Rao, president of the Indian Academy of Sciences. In session 2 Mr. Carl Thorne from the US, M.S. Dr. Ayatollahi, from Iran, and Ms. Carmen Richter Ribeiro Moura from Brazil dealt with The development of export controls. During the third session, which covered the Practice of Export Controls, Dr. Roger Heathcote from the UK, Mr. Toshiki Miyamoto from Japan, and Mr. Freddy Sagala from Indonesia spoke. In the final session Ambassador Pasi Patokallio from Finland, Dr. Harald Mulller from Germany and Mr. Jan Hoekema from the Netherlands offered their views on the Future of Export Controls.
6. On the basis of the dialogue started in Vienna a third step was taken with another international seminar on the role of export controls in nuclear non-proliferation. This seminar, with a similar structure as the 1997 one, took place in New York on 8-9 April 1999, and was chaired by Dr. Blix, IAEA Emeritus Director-General. Like in 1997, speakers were drawn from both NSG and non-NSG countries and from a variety of backgrounds so that the debate could cover a broad spectrum of views. In the opening session, Professor Alec Baer from Switzerland, Mr. Miguel Marin-Bosch from Mexico and Dr. Fritz Schmidt, Chairman of the Zangger Committee, spoke about the Development of Export Controls and their Role in International Nuclear Non-Proliferation. In the second session, Mr. Richard Stratford, US, Mr. Pedro Villagra Delgrado from Argentina and Ambassador Cyrus Nasseri from Iran dealt with the Practice of Export Controls and its effect on Trade and Peaceful Nuclear Activities. The third session on Further Cooperation in the Field of export Controls was covered by Mr. Andrey Efimov from the Russian Federation, Mr. Edward Yau from Hong Kong, China, and Mr. George Le Guelte from France. During the final session, Mr. William Reinsh from the US, Mr. Hiroyoshi Kurihara from Japan and Mr. David Albright from
the US dealt with the Future of Export Controls in International Nuclear Non-Proliferation. The seminar was concluded by a panel discussion in which the speakers elaborated on the issues that emerged from the previous sessions and from the questions by the audience.
The two seminars were attended by more than 350 participants, with representations from NPT and non-NPT countries and participation of international organizations (e.g. IAEA and CTBTO), intergovernmental organizations (Wassenaar Arrangement) and NGOs. Both in 1997 and 1999, NSG countries and the European Union provided financial support for the participation of experts from least developed and other countries facing economic hardship.
Both seminars aimed at promoting a genuine, open and all inclusive dialogue stressing how suppliers and recipients can deal constructively in evaluating the legitimacy and effectiveness of nuclear export controls as a contribution to nuclear non-proliferation while also promoting nuclear trade. By bringing together a large group of suppliers and recipients of nuclear material and equipment to exchange information, a number of misconceptions and misunderstandings about how export controls functioned, could be clarified.
All the speeches, together with the concluding remarks by the chairs of the 1997 and 1999 Seminar, have been complied in two booklets. These booklets, sent to all participants and available on request, thus formed the fourth step to enhance transparency.
With the aim of additional transparency, another step was taken to prepare an NSG web site where information and documentation about the NSG would be made available to governments and the public at large. This will provide easy access to, inter alia, the text of the NSG Guidelines, the list of items covered by these Guidelines, the NSG Collective Paper and the speeches and concluding remarks of the two International Seminars.
The NSG countries do not consider these steps as the conclusion of their transparency activities. Further transparency in nuclear related-export controls, promoted within a framework of dialogue and cooperation among all interested States party to the Treaty, will facilitate States to participate in the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information* Nuclear Suppliers Group guidelines, while reinforcing the international security environment, do not in any way affect the inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to developresearch, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



