I’I_

C

z

rJ)

(ID
(ID
—

rID

z
cjD

—

z
z

—

—
—

z

ri
—

(ID

C
—

C

z

(%4

Mr. Chairman,
Italy aligns itself with the statement of the European Union and I wish to add some
remarks in a national capacity.
Peaceful Uses and IAEA Technical Cooperation

This year marks the 60th anniversary of the IAEA which Italy as a founding member
has always supported both politically and financially not only through its major
contribution to the regular budget, but also through its voluntary contribution to the
Technical Cooperation Fund. Thanks to the Technical Cooperation Programme, many
experts from developing countries join Italian research institutes to specialize in areas
such as nuclear medicine or animal science while thousands of students have attended
the International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste since its foundation
in 1964.
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy entail serious responsibilities and go hand in
hand with safeguards, nuclear safety and nuclear security, for the promotion of which
Italy recognizes the central role of the IAEA.
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and IAEA Safeguards

With the increase of nuclear facilities and nuclear applications in the world it is
crucial that the IAEA can count on adequate human and financial resources that allow
it to apply safeguards as stipulated by its Statute and by the NPT.
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements together with Additional Protocols constitute
the current verification standard and Italy calls for their universalization without
delay in order to reassure the international community about the exclusively peaceful
nature of nuclear programs.
We are satisfied that Iran, in the context of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), is provisionally applying the Additional Protocol and we invite Iran to
ratify it without further delay. Its ratification will contribute to start the process that
may eventually allow the IAEA to grant the “Broader Conclusion”.
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Safety

Following two referendums, Italy has decided to abandon its nuclear energy program
and is consequently decommissioning its nuclear facilities. The Italian State company
SO.G.I.N. is in charge of the decommissioning on the basis of the highest
international safety and security standards.

3

In order to test the robustness and the technical, economic and time consistency of the
decommissioning program, an IAEA ARTEMIS peer review mission will take place
this year.
Italy also continues to attach a great importance to nuclear safety and its regulatory
authority ISPRA was submitted last November to an Integrated Regulatory Review
Service Mission (IRRS)
As a party to the main international conventions in the field of nuclear safety. Italy
presented its National Report at the 7th Review Meeting of the Convention on
Nuclear Safety (CNS) which recently took place in Vienna.
We call on all countries that have or intend to have a nuclear power program to
adhere to the relevant international conventions in the field of nuclear safety.
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and Nuclear Security
Ensuring the highest levels of nuclear security is a shared priority of the international
community and it would be a mistake to consider nuclear security as an obstacle to
peaceful uses. On the contrary, the highest standards of nuclear security offer the
necessary reassurances to the international community and therefore contribute to the
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Since 2011 Italy supports the International School on Nuclear Security, through
voluntary contributions to the Agency’s Nuclear Security Fund. The School, hosted
by the International Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste and jointly organized by
the IAEA and the ICTP is aimed at young professionals from developing countries
and, after seven successful editions, has served as a model for other regional schools.
After the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, Italy has joined the Nuclear
Security Contact Group (NSCG) and actively participates in its work. We encourage
those States that have not already done so to join the Nuclear Security Contact Group
as it can contribute to focus engagement within the IAEA.
Last but not least, Italy is fully engaged in the framework of the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism (GICNT). In the year of the 10th Anniversary of the
Initiative, we have hosted the 2016 session of the GICNT Nuclear Forensic Working
Group, in Rome last November and we intend to continue support its work in the
future.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your attention.
***

4

