PERMANENT MISSION OF JAMAICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

STATEMENT BY

MS. SHORNA-KAY RICHARDS
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF JAMAICA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

TO THE

2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO

THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
MAIN COMMITTEE III
TECHNICAL COOPERATION

NEW YORK, 12TH MAY 2015

Mr. Chairman,
As this is the first time that my delegation is taking the floor, I join previous speakers in
congratulating you on your election to guide the work of this Committee. You can be
assured of our full support and cooperation.
Jamaica recognizes and underscores the right of all States to peaceful uses of nuclear
energy in accordance with Article IV of the NPT. Indeed, the benefits to be gained
through peaceful application of nuclear energy remain of significant value to developing
countries.
For its part, Jamaica attaches high importance to leveraging nuclear technology to more
effectively meet the developmental challenges faced by ourselves and the wider
Caribbean sub-region. To this end, we have maintained a strong interest in the IAEA's
activities related to nuclear science, technology and related applications, from which we
continue to derive significant benefits. These include knowledge transfer gained from
IAEA related programmes, fellowships and scientific visits. Technical assistance of this
nature represents a most valuable component of our relationship with the IAEA, in
which we place great store and seek to maintain and indeed strengthen.
Mr. Chairman,
Jamaica became a State Party to the Agreement for the Cooperative Arrangement for
the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and the
Caribbean (ARCAL) in November 2011 and attaches great importance to the
collaboration we have forged through this regional mechanism, which focuses on some
of our critical socio-economic developmental needs.
We are pleased that the IAEA has been taking steps to deepen its collaboration with the
Caribbean. This has no doubt contributed to the fact that a Caribbean country has been
among the group of new members admitted in each of the last four General
Conferences - Dominica, Trinidad and Tobago, The Bahamas and Guyana. Jamaica
welcomes the IAEA's increasing efforts to collaborate with our sub-region and that it
continues to take tangible steps to provide support through a number of initiatives,
including via the co-hosting of sub-regional workshops.
In November 2012, Jamaica hosted an IAEA Sub-regional Workshop on Tools and
Best Practices for Technical Cooperation Project Design. We also hosted an IAEA
Meeting on Nuclear Law for Member States in the Caribbean Region, in March of
2014, within the framework of the IAEA technical cooperation project entitled:
Strengthening the Regional Nuclear Sector and the Application of Nuclear
Science and Technology for Development through Training and Facilitating
Strategic Activities. The Meeting provided, inter alia, a comprehensive overview of the
relevant international legal instruments governing nuclear safety, security and other
safeguards, as well as the development of a national legal infrastructure.

1

National Projects
At the national level, Jamaica has benefited from projects in several areas and is
actively engaged with the Department for Technical Cooperation for Latin America
(TCLA) in developing projects in areas of high priority , in particular health and water
resources management. The project in the health sector complements the initiatives
that Jamaica and our sister CARICOM states have spearheaded at the United Nations
and the World Health Organisation (WHO) to promote the development and
implementation of prevention and control policies that can address the grave
multidimensional challenges posed by Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs).
Our efforts are based on a multi-sectoral approach that is focused both on prevention
and cure. With regard to the latter, we consider the use of nuclear medicine to be
critical. In this regard, the support of the IAEA for our efforts to re-establish a Nuclear
Medicine Capacity for the management of NCDs, including Cardiac diseases and
cancers, is of vital importance. We are, therefore, pleased that in response to our
request, the IAEA undertook several Missions to Jamaica during 2012 and 2013. These
included an Impact Mission to carry out a wide-ranging assessment of our cancer
control capacity and needs.
Another Mission provided support to a project currently being implemented that focuses
on the sustainable management of water resources to prevent deterioration in the
quality and quantity of drinking water in urban areas.
In recognition of the value and importance of the cooperation projects being undertaken
with the support of the IAEA, Jamaica has taken steps to meet its current obligations in
relation to the Technical Cooperation arrangements. We will make further efforts to
meet our obligations in this area, despite serious resource challenges.

Research and Technology
Mr. Chairman,
In the field of research and technology, we have embarked on a project in partnership
with the IAEA and the United States aimed at converting the fuel used in our nuclear
research reactor from Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) to Low Enriched Uranium (LEU),
thereby decreasing non-proliferation risks while doubling the reactor's utilization
capacity. We express appreciation to the IAEA and the Government of the United
· States for the assistance that is being given to Jamaica, in particular under the Peaceful
Uses Initiative (PUI). The additional capacity will allow us to expand research work
related to food safety, food security and air quality. Moreover, with the additional
capacity provided to what is the Caribbean's only research reactor, we will be able to
accommodate the research needs of other countries from the Caribbean. We
encourage other States to pursue fuel conversion in keeping with international efforts,
supported by the IAEA, to reduce the amount of HEU used in research reactors around
the world.
2

Mr. Chairman,
In 2014, CARICOM launched its Nonproliferation for Development Initiative (NOi) aimed
at highlighting the practical benefits of nonproliferation through the advancement of
implementation activities. Under this Initiative, Jamaica and fellow CARICOM Member
States continue to explore a range of new programmmes with various
intergovernmental organizations including the IAEA. Cooperation with the IAEA has
been primarily aimed at improving food security and attending to important ecological
concerns, such as ocean acidification. In addition, we continue to work with the IAEA on
issues relating to the safe transportation of radioactive materials, given the fundamental
importance of these materials to healthcare and to industry in general.
More recently, the IAEA has cooperated with the CARICOM-UNSCR 1540
Implementation Programme to stage a special initiative targeting CARICOM Member
States, which focuses on the safe transportation of nuclear materials. The main
rationale for this initiative, which commenced in June 2014, is to address the deficit of
regulatory mechanisms within CARICOM Member States, in order to ensure the safe
transportation of nuclear and radiological materials commonly used in several
development-related domains, particularly in the health sector.
While a key focus of the initiative involves the handling and physical protection of
nuclear materials, a major interest is to address the challenges that several CARICOM
states continue to face in obtaining affordable radiological materials, including Cobalt60, used in radiation treatment in hospitals across the region. This is of particular
importance given the fact that these countries do not have proper legislation and
attendant regulations in place.
Since 2014, the CARICOM 1540 Implementation Programme has been used by the
IAEA as a coordinating platform to address these issues, considering that the ongoing
legislative programme in support of 1540 implementation also considers regulations that
overlap with those proposed to address issues related to the transportation of
radioactive material.
This represents the first time that such an initiative had been specifically geared
towards Caribbean countries, which have limited radiation safety infrastructure. The
programme is also educating and informing CARICOM Member States about key
issues surrounding the safe transportation of radioactive materials, including
international regulations pertaining to the transportation of radioactive materials,
required documentation and labeling protocols, self-assessment approaches, as well as
the development of a transportation network predicated on international best practices.
The implementation of basic controls for the transport of radioactive material and the
development of emergency responses to transport incidents has also been a key priority
of this initiative. In fact, it builds on another ongoing activity currently funded by the
IAEA in the Caribbean, which is the development of an emergency response
architecture that can be deployed in the event of a nuclear or radiological incident.
It is also important to mention that under this initiative, ongoing IAEA programmes such
as the Thematic Safety Areas (TSA-7) that focus on Transportation Safety and the
3

Radiation Safety Information Management System (RASIMS), which have been of clear
benefit to other Member States, are also slated to be instituted within Jamaica and other
Member States of the Caribbean Community.
In closing, I wish to underscore that the IAEA's practical and meaningful technical
cooperation projects are greatly appreciated by Jamaica and many small developing
Members States. The benefits we derive from such collaboration continues to make a
tangible contribution to our ability to strengthen our capacity to pursue the peaceful uses
and application of nuclear energy, while at the same time furthering our efforts to
achieve our development aspirations.
Thank you.

4

