(check against delivery,)

SrATEMENT BY AMBAssADoR MITSURU KITANO,
AMBAssADoR, PERMANENT MISSION OF JAPAN TO THE

International Organizations in Vienna

FIRST SEssioN OF THE PREPARATORY CoMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REviEw CoNFEiENcE OF THE PARTIEs TO THE rIREATY
ON THE NON-PR0UFERATI0N OF NucLE&R WEAPONS NPT)

-

CLUSTER

III PEACEFUL USES

OF NUCLEAR ENERGY-

VIENNA, 9 MAY 2017

Mr. Chairman,
The importance of peaceful applications of nuclear science and
technology continues to grow as the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (SDGs) becomes high on our agenda.
In this context, Japan reaffirms the inalienable right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in conformity with nowproliferation obligations, as
stated in the article IV of the Treaty.
The three pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing.

rpo

maintain

and reinforce the NPT regime, it is of great importance to continue our
efforts to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We should be reminded that we reached a consensus ad referendum
on the cluster 3 issues in 2015 Review Conference. Thus, Japan sees the
necessity to create a robust momentum toward a consensus in 2020 by
highlighting the progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Mr. Chairman,
Japan commends the remarkable progress in 1AEA’s activities in this
area under Director General Amano’s “Atoms for Peace and Development”,
and welcomes the Agency’s focus on assisting its Member States in achieving
the SDGs.
In addition to contribution to Technical Cooperation Fund, Japan has
been a major supporter to the IAEA’s Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUT) to
mobilize additional resources for the Agency’s unfunded activities. PUI has
been a great success, mobilizing more than 100 million Euro since its
establishment in 2010. This endeavor should be further enhanced. Japan, for

its part, has contributed more than 26 million dollars in total to PUL Since
the 2015 Review Conference, in particular, when we Japan announced 5 year
commitment of 25 million dollars, we have disbursed more than 13 million
dollars to PUT to support a wide variety of projects. The project we supported
include emergency assistance to make a quick response to global threats
such as Ebola Virus and Zika Virus.

Mr. Chairman,
Japan also places great importance on non-financial contributions to
the TAEA’s activities

such as partnership-building, human resource

development and basic radiation education. As part of our support to the
TAEA in partnership-building, for instance, Japan invited Director General
Amano to the 6th Tokyo Tnternational Conference on African Development
(TICAD VT) last August in Kenya to support awareness raising of the TAEA’s
activities. The upcoming International Conference on the Technical
Cooperation this May is another important opportunity for various
development stakeholders to get connected with the IAEA, and our
development agency JTCA will participate in the Conference.

Mr. Chairman,
Development of civil uses of nuclear energy has been underpinned by
efforts of beneficiary countries to ensure the highest standards of safety,

security and safeguards with transparency. in relation to this cluster, 1
would like to stress the importance of achieving and maintaining the highest
levels of nuclear safety worldwide.

Development of infrastructure and human resources is essential in
ensuring nuclear safety, and we should continue to build on lessons learned
from the Fukushima Daiichi accident in this regard.
International organizations such as the IAEA and the OECD/NEA
play important roles in promoting nuclear safety worldwide through such
functions as establishing standards, codes and conducting peer reviews.
Japan has been actively engaged in international cooperation centered on
these organizations.
For example, Japan is sending national experts to the IAEA’s
Commission for Safety Standards and related Committees and supporting
infrastructure development in countries newly embarking on nuclear power
plants with an extra-budgetary contribution to the IAEA. Also, the L’\EA’s
first Capacity Building Center (CBC) was designated in Fukushima in 2013,
where workshops on emergency preparedness and responses have been
organized for government officials from Japan and abroad. Around 300
people from about 60 countries of the Asia-Pacific and beyond have so far
participated in the workshops.
Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS) provides another platform for
international cooperation in enhancing nuclear safety We encourage the
Contracting Parties of the CNS to commit themselves to working toward
further universalization of the Convention as well as an effective and
sustainable implementation of the Convention and the principles of Vienna
Declaration. Japan actively participated in the recently-held

7th

Review

Meeting of the CNS and is ready to work on further improvements in the
implementation of CNS building on the outcomes of the Meeting. With

regard to the international legal frameworks on nuclear safety, Japan also
encourages

all

the

countries

to join

international

nuclear liability

instruments toward establishing a global nuclear liability regime.
In the context of expanding international cooperation,

while

recognizing that responsibility for nuclear power plants rests entirely with
that state, we affirm that every stakeholder involved in nuclear technology
transfers has a role to play in paying due consideration to nuclear safety in a
transparent manner.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, as a leading country in applications of nuclear science
and technology, Japan renews its commitment to working together with NPT
State parties, the international organizations such as the IAEA and the
whole international community for the promotion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

