
Nuclear energy has made an invaluable contribution to mankind in various areas including human health and medicine, food and agriculture and industry. A large number of countries strongly support the development of peaceful uses for nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Over the last few years, a growing number of countries worldwide have expressed their interest in embarking on nuclear power programs. The promotion of applications of nuclear power is considered crucial to meeting the challenge of providing sufficient and reliable energy to support the world's sustainable development for the benefit of all. This renewed interest in the potential of nuclear power is shown by the resolution on nuclear power applications adopted at the fifty-first General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
These new circumstances have high relevance to the implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Article IV of the NPT establishes the "inalienable right" of all States Parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty. Applications of nuclear power are an important part of peaceful uses foreseen in article IV of the NPT
Due to its dual nature, certain nuclear technology can be misused for non-peaceful purposes. Furthermore, should nuclear accidents occur, they would cause a serious consequence not only to the country where the nuclear power plant in question locates, hut also to the neighboring countries and to the international community as a whole. Since 11 September 2001, the international community has renewed its awareness of the real and imminent threat of terrorism involving nuclear weapons and material.
Japan is of the view that, while each state has a right to define its national energy policy, the use of nuclear power must be accompanied by commitments to effective implementation of nuclear Safeguards, Safely and Security (3Ss) in accordance with its national requirement and its relevant international obligations including those under the NPT. It is even more important for the international community to
reconfirm the common understanding that ensuring 3Ss constitutes an indispensable part of the necessary infrastructure for the introduction of nuclear power generation. While ensuring 3Ss is primarily the responsibility of the countries interested in nuclear power programs, international cooperation in this field is beneficial to support the countries concerned.
In this regard, Japan submitted a working paper entitled "Peaceful uses of nuclear energy and Japan's experience" (NPT/CONF.2010/PCII/WP.8) to this Second Session of the Preparatory Committee. We hope that our paper will provide an important basis for enhancing discussion on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan has long attached great importance to nuclear safety, and strived to address particular safety issues and enhance safety culture in general. Of particular note among Japan's contributions are its long-time support for Chernobyl safety enhancement projects through the Nuclear Safety Account (NSA) and the Chernobyl Shelter Fund (CSF). Japan contributed US$31 million to the NSA and pledged to pay US$55 million to the CSF. Moreover, Japan has contributed to the formulation of the Asian Nuclear Safety Network (ANSN) in tandem with the IAEA. Given that a number of Asian countries now intend to introduce nuclear power plants, Japan believes that more attention needs to be paid to enhancing nuclear safety in Asian region.
Mr. Chairman,
In relation to the importance of nuclear safety, I would like to briefly mention the issue of transport of radioactive materials.
Considering the uneven geographical distribution of resources in the world and specific technology possessed by a limited number of countries, transport of radioactive materials is an essential element to reaping the benefits from peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this connection, ensuring the safe and smooth transport of radioactive materials is important for all countries that support the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The maritime transport of radioactive materials to and from Japan is carried out in
accordance with the principles of international law, including maritime navigational rights and freedoms. It has been conducted in a thoroughly safe manner over the past thirty years, in strict conformity with international standards. In this connection, Japan received an IAEA Transport Safety Appraisal Service (TranSAS) mission in December 2005, and is pleased with the mission's conclusion that relevant Japanese regulations on the transport of radioactive materials are being enforced in accordance with IAEA requirements. Japan continues to make every effort to further improve safety in this regard.
Furthermore, Japan has been making every effort to enhancing understanding of coastal States on maritime transport, and is pleased that discussions on communication between shipping States and coastal States have made significant progress recently. We are certain that a cooperative spirit on the part of both the coastal and the shipping sides will continue to prevail as is requested by the IAEA General Conference resolution adopted in September 2007.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear security also constitutes an important building block that demands serious attention for ensuring peaceful use of nuclear energy. Events of September 11th incited the sense of urgency for the need of combating nuclear terrorism.
In this respect, Japan calls on all States that have yet to do so to become parties, as soon as practicable, to the two universal instruments for combating nuclear terrorism; namely, the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material including its amendment.
Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA has an essential role to play in the field of nuclear security. It has significant programmes financed through its Nuclear Security Fund. The Agency also serves as the focal point for coordinating various international efforts to enhancing nuclear security worldwide. Japan has therefore continued to contribute to the Nuclear Security Fund.
Japan welcomes the on-going discussions on the issue of assurance of nuclear fuel
supply, and believes it important to establish an effective framework which can be widely accepted and to allow many countries to participate. Japan's proposal at the September 2006 IAEA General Conference Special Event, an "IAEA Standby Arrangements System for the Assurance of Nuclear Fuel Supply", covers not only uranium enrichment but also all important activities of the front-end of nuclear fuel cycle: uranium ore supply, conversion and fuel fabrication, uranium stock and reserves. The proposal is compatible with other proposals and will contribute to enhancing transparency and predictability of the front-end market. Japan intends to continue to actively contribute to the discussion on assurance of nuclear fuel supply and is currently examining how to concretely follow up its proposal.
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy include not only electric power generation but also the application of nuclear technology in such fields as human health, agriculture, and so on. Given that "Human Security" is now one of the key perspectives of Japan's foreign policy, Japan places the highest priority on human health, in particular fighting cancer by using radiation therapy in relation to the applications of nuclear Technology. Japan, therefore, has been the Project Lead Country in Human Health under the Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research, Development and Training in Asia and the Pacific region (RCA).
International technical cooperation in the area of the peaceful use of nuclear technology plays a key role in achieving the goal of the NPT. Japan has been a major contributor to the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund since 1959, and has paid its share of TCF in full. Japan urges the IAEA Member States to pay in full and on time their respective shares of the TCF targets, on the basis of shared responsibility. Japan firmly believes that the IAEA Member States and Secretariat should make efforts to ensure that the Technical Cooperation Program is implemented more effectively, with more efficient management by the IAEA Secretariat.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan would like to reiterate that nuclear non-proliferation, safety and security are the issues that the international community has to address thoroughly. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy also must be carried out with the confidence of the international community by faithfully fulfilling NPT obligations with a high level of transparency. In this regard, Japan is pleased that it has become the fust case in which integrated safeguards are implemented to a State with large-scale nuclear
activities, based on the IAEA conclusion about the peaceful nature of Japan's nuclear activities.
Japan will continue to work together with the international community to make every effort to ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.