(check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR MITSURU KIT ANO,
AMBASSADOR, PERMANENT MISSION OF JAPAN TO THE
International Organ izations in Vienna

SECOND SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
FOR THE 2020 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)

- CLUSTER III PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY GENEVA,
1 MAY 2018

1

Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the third pillar of the
NPT, is greatly important to maintain and reinforce the NPT regime. At the same
time, maintaining and strengthening the NPT regime are essential for the
reinforcement of international cooperation for the peaceful uses. We should engage
in a constructive discussion in this cluster 3 as well and create the momentum
towards the consensus at the 2020 NPT Review Conference.
The importance of nuclear science and technology for socio economic
development continues to grow. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (SDGs) becomes high on our agenda. In this context,
Japan reaffirms the importance of the inalienable right to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy of State Parties in conformity with non-proliferation obligations, as
stated in the article IV of the Treaty. On this basis, Japan calls on State Parties to
work together in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and providing
relevant State Parties access to all benefits from the peaceful uses.

Mr. Chairman,
We believe these activities can deliver tangible results which support the
attainment of the SDGs. For the past decades, the IAEA has contributed
significantly to the promotion of the peaceful uses. The IAEA' s Director General
Amano is working towards the achievement of the SD Gs under the motto "Atoms
for Peace and Development." Japan strongly supports the IAEA' s activities for
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In addition to contribution to Technical Cooperation Fund , Japan has
contributed approximately 20 million dollars to the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI)
since the 2015 NPT Review Conference to support a wide variety of the projects.

2

This year, Japan has already disbursed about 3.3 million dollars to enhance the
IAEA' s assistance capability for an emergency response to global threats such as
infectious diseases and natural disasters. Japan calls on State Parties in a position
to do so, to support this effective initiative, the PUI.

Mr. Chairman,
The Renovation of the Nuclear Applications Laboratories (ReNuAL) project
of the IAEA will greatly contribute to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Japan has disbursed about 6 million dollars to the project and welcomes the
progress made until now. Japan believes the Laboratories in Seibersdorf will bring
benefits to all the countries, and therefore hopes the project to be completed with
wide ranging support from State Parties.
The IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Science and Technology in
November this year will be a valuable opportunity to promote the application of
nuclear science and technology. As a co-chair of the conference, Japan is making
its utmost efforts in the preparation process so that the conference will be
successful.

Mr. Chairman,
Japan 1s actively supporting IAEA' s human resource development and
technological transfer. For instance, we host a number of IAEA workshops and
training courses in Japan. Also, Japanese experts participate in IAEA projects,
especially those under the RCA and Japanese companies support IAEA activities
including through the provision of equipment. Japan continues to place priority on
expanding these human and technological contributions.

3

It is essential for the IAEA to build new partnerships with other international
organizations and private sectors, in order to respond to increasingly growing needs
in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Japan also commends IAEA' s
efforts for the partnership-building.

Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be underpinned
by efforts to ensure the highest standards of safety and security. I would like to
stress the importance of achieving and maintaining the highest levels of nuclear
safety and security to this end. In this respect, development of safety infrastructure
and human resources is essential, and we should continue to share and build on
lessons learned from the Fukushima Daiichi accident
For example, the

IAEA' s first Capacity Building Center (CBC)

was

designated in Fukushima in 2013, where workshops on emergency preparedness and
responses have been organized for government officials from various countries.
Around 400 people from about 60 countries of the Asia-Pacific and beyond have so
far participated in the workshops.

Mr. Chairman,
International organizations such as the IAEA and the OECD/ NEA play
important roles in promoting nuclear safety worldwide through such functions as
establishing safety standards and codes, and conducting peer reviews . Japan has
been actively engaged in international cooperation conducted through these
organizations.
Conventions regarding nuclear safety provide platforms for international
cooperation in enhancing nuclear safety. We encourage the Contracting Parties of

4

these conventions to commit themselves to working toward their universalization as
well as effective and sustainable implementation based on the principles of Vienna
Declaration. Later this month, the 6th Joint Convention Review Meeting will be held
in Vienna, and we encourage Contracting Parties to actively participate in the
meeting. Also, with regard to the international legal frameworks on nuclear liability,
Japan encourages all countries to join relevant international legal instruments, in
particular the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage,
with a view to establishing an international liability regime.

Mr. Chairman,
While recognizing that it is the responsibility of each country to ensure the
safety and security of their nuclear facilities, Japan stresses the role of all
stakeholders involved in nuclear cooperation and trade in promoting nuclear safety
and security. Those include assisting the development of the recipient countries '
infrastructure according to the highest standards of safety and security. In this
regard, Japan calls upon all nuclear supplier states to take appropriate measures,
prior to entering into a contract to supply a nuclear power plant, in line with
international best practices, to assure themselves that recipient states have a
robust domestic nuclear safety, security and non-proliferation infrastructure and
have hosted IAEA peer review missions.

Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion , as a leading country in applications of nuclear science and
technology, Japan renews its strong commitment to working together with NPT
State Parties, the international organizations such as the IAEA and the whole
international community for the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

5

