Mr. Chairman,
In cluster 3, I would like to discuss briefly Japan's views regarding nuclear energy, nuclear safety and security, the peaceful application of nuclear technology and the promotion of technical cooperation.
1. Nuclear Energy Mr. Chairman,
Promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy serves to secure a stable supply of electric power and to preserve the global environment. As a nation that has ratified the NPT and agreed to the indefinite extension of the NPT, Japan attaches great importance to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Japan has promoted the right to develop and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes as one of the key principles of the NPT. At the same time, we are cognizant of the equally important undertaking of fully complying with non-proliferation obligations. Japan will continue to promote nuclear power and establish a nuclear fuel cycle system by steadily promoting the development of the FBR. At the same time, ensuring nuclear safety and transparency remain
the top priority of Japan. We continue to make every effort to uphold the highest standard of safety and transparency.
2. Nuclear Safety Mr. Chairman,
Ensuring nuclear safety is a prerequisite for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Nuclear safety is of the utmost concern and highest importance to Japan, which is fully committed to the peaceful use of nuclear energy for sustaining its national economy. We believe that building a regional nuclear safety network to share knowledge and experience in nuclear safety will ingrain the idea of a "safety culture" and will enhance nuclear safety performance. Such benefits will not be confined to the countries in the region but also shared globally. I would like to express the readiness of Japan to work with the IAEA on the initiative of a global nuclear safety network. We would like to continue, together with the IAEA, to contribute to increasing the prevalence of safety culture through bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan believes in the great importance of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management and the Convention on Nuclear Safety for the enhancement of nuclear safety performance, and we urge those states who have not yet done so to conclude these Conventions as soon as possible. The First Review Meeting on the Joint Convention, which took place last November, contributed to the global safety of spent fuel and radioactive waste management. We hope the Third Review Meeting pursuant to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which will be held next April, will play a significant role in enhancing global nuclear safety.
3. Transport of Radioactive Materials
Mr. Chairman,
A number of countries have been conducting the transport of radioactive materials. The transport of radioactive materials is an essential element that supports the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Therefore, ensuring the safe and smooth transport of radioactive mateials is an important issue for all countries that support the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The maritime transport of radioactive materials relating to Japan is carried out in accordance with the principles of international law, including the right of innocent passage through territorial waters and freedom of navigation on the high seas, including the exclusive economic zone. It is conducted in a thoroughly safe manner in strict conformity with international standards established under the authority of competent international organizations, such as the IAEA and the IMO. Japan has also provided information regarding its maritime transport to relevant coastal states to the extent possible, fully taking into account, among other things, the requirements of physical protection.
On the basis of the recommendation of the International Conference on the Safety of Transport of Radioactive Material last July, the IAEA Action Plan was adopted at the technical meeting last January and approved by the IAEA Board of Governors last March. The Action Plan on the Safety of Transport defines the policies to be implemented under the authority of the Agency and provides guidance for work to be undertaken by the Agency over the next five years. The Government of Japan regards the Action Plan as scientifically and technically sound and is pleased to support it.
Japan sincerely hopes that the implementation of this Action Plan will further enhance the safety of transport of radioactive materials and facilitate international confidence in such transport.
4. Protection against nuclear terrorism Mr. Chairman,
Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, nuclear security has become an important issue that should be urgently dealt with by the international community. No country is free from this threat, and we must meet the challenge collectively. The IAEA plays a vital role in this area. This is the reason why Japan supports the implementation of the action plan by the Agency and has made a financial contribution to the Agency's Nuclear Security Fund. Through this fund, Japan, along with others, is actively contributing to the project to upgrade the nuclear material accounting and control system at ULBA Fuel Fabrication Facility in Kazakhstan.
Mr. Chairman,
The safety and security of radioactive sources is also becoming an important issue. Japan supports the international efforts in this area. Japan welcomes in particular, the revised "Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources" and has conveyed Japan s commitment to the IAEA Secretariat to support the Code of Conduct. Japan calls upon Member States to affirm their commitment to the Code and to take the necessary steps to strengthen the security of radioactive sources in their respective countries. Japan hopes that the IAEA will make continuous efforts, in line with its action plan, to strengthen the safety and security of radioactive sources.
Mr. Chairman,
In order to detect the illicit use of nuclear material and radiation sources and protect against nuclear terrorism, the importance of improving the state systems for accounting and control (SSAC) cannot be over-emphasized. We should make every effort to support such efforts.
The additional protocol provides an effective tool also for detecting illicit nuclear activities. Under the additional protocol, Member States are required to submit a report to the Agency on the import and export of nuclear materials, equipment and technology. This is yet another reason for us to promote the universalization of the additional protocol.
5.	Physical Protection Mr. Chairman,
Japan shares the view that international frameworks of physical protection of nuclear msterials and facilities must be strengthened to protect against nuclear terrorism. Japan attaches importance to the international legal framework for physical protection and to call on those states that have not yet concluded the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) to do so without delay.
In order to strengthen the physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities, an open-ended group of experts met the last two years to discuss an amendment text of the CPPNM, but could not reach an agreement on a final text. Japan hopes that an agreement on the amendment will be reached soon at the Amendment Conference. In this regard, Japan welcomes the initiative, particularly by the Government of Austria, to expedite an agreement on amending the scope of the CPPNM.
6.	Nuclear Sciences and Applications Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear technology offers enormous potential for sustainable development and promoting
human security. 1 would like to express our support for the IAEA's contributions to various
global issues. We also welcome the active participation of the IAEA in global forums, such as
WSSD and the World Water Forum (WWF). We fully recognize that the utilization of nuclear
5
technology in various fields, such as human health, agriculture, and water resources, is one of the most important activities of the IAEA.
7. Technical Cooperation Mr. Chairman,
The promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy through technical cooperation is an important responsibility of the States party to the NPT. In particular, we recognize the increasingly important role played by technical cooperation activities through the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund. We believe that IAEA activities, not only in the field of nuclear power, but also in broader fields such as water, health, agricultural and industrial applications, will contribute to sustainable development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals. From this viewpoint, Japan will continue to promote international cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, including the Regional Cooperative Agreement for Asia and the °acific (RCA).
Mr. Chairman,
Japan has consistently paid fully its share of the IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund since its foundation in 1959. This means that, in spite of financial difficulties, we are making in effect a contribution of nearly a quarter of the total Technical Cooperation Fund. We believe all Member States should make every effort to pay, on the basis of shared responsibility. We also believe the Agency should manage and implement the Technical Cooperation program most efficiently in meeting the expectations of Member States. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.