To be checked against delivery

Statement by Ambassador Toshiro Ozawa,
Permanent Mission of Japan to the International Organizations in Vienna
Cluster 3 issues
First Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference
for the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
9 May 2012

Mr. Chairman,
As Cluster Ill deals with the issue of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, before
starting my statement, please let me reiterate my sincere gratitude to all
countries, worldwide for the heartwarming encouragement and support kindly
rendered to us in coping with the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami,
and the accident at the Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPC0)'s Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power Station.

Mr. Chairman,
It is expected that a number of countries around the world, particularly in Asia,
will continue to reinforce or initiate nuclear power generation. The high growth of
the demand for energy and the wish to mitigate the carbon emissions from
power generation are the driving forces behind this phenomenon, and we note
that the IAEA estimates that about 90 (low projection) to 350 (high projection)
more nuclear power stations are likely to be completed by 2030. In addition, the
benefits of the use of nuclear technologies for health and other non-power
applications have become well known, and expectations for enhanced access
and usage of these technologies is now shared globally. In such circumstances,
we should acknowledge that international cooperation on non-proliferation,
nuclear safety and security have become more important than ever.
Japan began to embark on its nuclear power program in 1957. We had put a
priority on safety in developing our nuclear power industry which, until recently,

had grown to more than 50 nuclear reactors. The accident at TEPCO1s
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, however, has dealt a serious blow to
the Japanese perception regarding nuclear safety. Needless to say, every effort
was made to bring the 3 reactors to a state of cold-shutdown last December.
Currently there are no nuclear reactors in operation in Japan, as almost all
reactors are undergoing periodic inspection.
The government of Japan is determined to raise the safety standards of its
nuclear power facilities to the highest level worldwide, and is reinforcing its
nuclear safety regulations in a fundamental manner.
At the same time, Japan finds it of importance to share with the international
community, including countries seeking to use nuclear power generation, the
knowledge and lessons learned from the accident. Japan stands ready to
respond to the interests of countries seeking to use nuclear power generation by
supporting their efforts, including their expectations for improving nuclear safety.
From this viewpoint, Japan remains steadfast in responding positively to their
interest in our undertakings.
Japan fully supports the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety endorsed by the
IAEA General Conference in September 2011, and believes that the highest
levels of safety should be promoted worldwide based on the Action Plan. For its
part, Japan commits itself to the implementation of the Plan, and encourages all
countries concerned to make every effort to address the issues identified in the
Plan. Japan will host the Fukushima Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety in
December this year in co-sponsorship with the IAEA, and in the Conference, we
wish to confirm the progress made in implementing the Action Plan, and to share
the lessons that have learned with the objective of strengthening nuclear safety
worldwide.
The Fukushima accident was caused by natural disasters, but it did remind us all
of the importance of nuclear security. Japan welcomes the successful outcome
of the Nuclear Security Summit held in Seoul in March this year, and appeals to
all State Parties to maintain the highest possible standards of security and
physical protection of nuclear materials and facilities, as expressed in the Final
Document of the 2010 NPT Review Conference. As noted in that Final
Document, while nuclear safety and security are national responsibilities, the
IAEA should play the key role in the development of safety standards, nuclear

security guidance and relevant conventions based on best practices.
Japan fully supports the IAEA's nuclear security programme and new initiatives,
including the establishment of the Nuclear Security Guidance Committee and
Global Network for Nuclear Security Support Centres. Japan commends the
IAEA for its efforts to strengthen international cooperation for enhancing nuclear
security worldwide.
Mr. Chairman,
Under the NPT, all States Parties enjoy the inalienable right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination and in conformity with its Articles I, II and ill. I have already
mentioned that the benefits of the use of nuclear technologies for health and
other non-power applications have become well known, and that expectations
for enhanced access to and usage of the technologies are now shared globally.
We wish to point out that technical cooperation to promote access to, and usage
of the nuclear technologies is an important responsibility of the NPT States
Parties.
Japan has consistently paid its financial share to the IAEATechnical Cooperation
Fund (TCF) in full and has achieved a 100% "Rate of Attainment" since the
foundation of the TCF in 1959. Japan urges other IAEA Member States to do the
same.
In this regard, Japan recognizes the merits of the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI),
especially for developing countries. Japan made a contribution of 3.5 million
US dollars to the PUI last December, and will make a contribution of the same
amount in the current fiscal year.

I wish to point out also that Japan, together with 11 States Parties submitted a
working paper on technical cooperation to the 2010 NPT Review Conference.
We take pride that a number of elements contained in this working paper were
incorporated into the Actions which the 2010 Review Conference called upon the
States Parties to take.
Mr. Chairman,

We are also very pleased that the IAEA Director General's initiatives for
promoting peaceful use of nuclear energy have produced tangible outcomes in
the fields of cancer treatment, agricultural production and water treatment. We
understand that the IAEA will put a focus on nuclear techniques related to food
this year, and certainly, Japan intends to cooperate fully in this field as well.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan will continue to work together with the international community to make
every effort to promote and ensure the peaceful use of nuclear energy in a safe
and sustainable manner.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

