Statement by Ambassador Mitsuru KITANO
Representative of Japan
to Main Committee Ill of the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Mr Chairman,
At the outset, let me congratulate you, on behalf of the Government of Japan,
on your assumption of the Chairmanship of Main Committee Ill. Please be assured of
our full confidence in your able guidance and of our full cooperation with you in
bringing about fruitful outcomes of this Committee.
Mr Chairman,
Over the past 5 years, we have witnessed important developments and
progress in most of the actions contained in the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference.
The peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology have been promoted in
the past 5 years for the benefits of a large number of States parties. Nuclear science
and technology have the potential to make a tangible contribution to effectively
addressing

global

challenges

such

as

sustainable

development

and

the

environmental protection, as most recently evidenced by the IAEA's swift response to
the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease. The newly established IAEA Peaceful Uses
Initiative, PUI, has mobilized over 77 million US dollar and has benefitted more than
130 countries throughout the world over the last 5 years. I would like to commend the
IAEA for its tireless efforts to support developing countries in this regard.
In our view, increased recognition of the potential contribution of the
application of nuclear science and technology and its further promotion would
facilitate and promote the future implementation of the upcoming post-2015
development agenda.
years.

We should maintain this positive momentum in the coming

At the same time, the Fukushima Daiichi accident, reminded us all of the
utmost importance of nuclear safety worldwide. The promotion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear science and technology is best achieved through experience and lessons
learned in nuclear safety.

--

Mr Chairmal'.l,
Under the NPT, all State parties enjoy the inalienable right to the development
of research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and Ill. At the same time, the use of
nuclear science and technology must be accompanied by commitment to the on-going
implementation of safeguards, as well as safety, security and radiation protection at
an appropriate and effective level, in accordance with States' national legislation and
respective international obligations.
Based upon these basic principles, Japan has submitted a Working Paper
entitled "Enhancement of peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology" to this
Review Conference, which highlights key elements for ft,1rther strengthening peaceful
uses of nuclear science and technology.
Mr Chairman,
Japan emphasizes the importance of enhancing access to nuclear science
and technology for the benefit of developing countries, through various measures
including capacity-building, the provision of equipment, strengthening regional
networking and regional cooperation frameworks such as the RCA in Asia, or AFRA in
Africa, and facilitating cooperation among developing countries.
Japan also emphasizes the importance of broadening areas for nuclear
applications to enable States to meet their fundamental needs for socioeconomic
developments in wide-ranging areas such as human health including cancer therapy,
nutrition, food security and safety, agriculture, water management, environmental
protection, industrial application and energy production.
In this context, the ongoing project of modernizing the IAEA's Nuclear
Applications Laboratories in Seibersdorf, Austria, or ReNuAL, is very important as it
will help the IAEA to greatly enhance research and development in various nuclear
applications, by providing further opportunities for technology transfer to its Member
States. For the purpose of supporting the IAEA in implementing the project as
expeditiously as possible, I am pleased to announce that Japan will disburse 2 million
US dollars from our contribution to the PUI. Japan encourages other interested
countries to do the same, and looks forward to working with them in this endeavour.
Mr Chairman,
As I previously touched upon, Japan acknowledges the central role of the

IAEA in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology in all aspects.
We stress the importance of the work of the IAEA to cooperate with its Member States

through its Technical Cooperation Programmes based on their respective national
needs. The PUI is a valuable mechanism that supplements the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Fund and mobilizes additional resources for a range of important IAEA
programmes. Japan has contributed more than 13 million US dollars over the past 5
years to support the PUI.
In this regard, I am pleased to reiterate once again the announcement made
by Foreign Minister Kishida last week, that Japan will contribute a total of 25 million
US dollars over the next 5 years to the PUI. We hope that this will show Japan's
resolve to maintain the positive momentum generated in the area of peaceful uses
and to further support IAEA:s activities in the coming years. I would like to encourage
those State parties and relevant organizations to do the same.
Mr Chairman,
Strengthening nuclear safety and radiation protection constitutes a vital
element for the development of nuclear science and technology, both in nuclear power
and non-power applications. Japan underlines the importance for the States parties to
continue maintaining and improving national and international infrastructures for
nuclear safety and radiation protection.
Following the Fukushima Daiichi accident, considerable efforts have been
made all over the world to strengthen nuclear safety. For Japan, managing the
aftermath of the Fukushima Daiichi accident remains a priority. We have been
implementing measures to effectively address a variety of challenges such as
contaminated water, decommissioning, marine monitoring and remediation issues in
close cooperation with the IAEA and the international community.
After the accident, the Nuclear Regulation Authority was established as an
independent regulator. Consequently, existing nuclear power plants must be placed
under the regulator's scrutiny and meet the new regulatory requirements before
restarting operations. While nuclear power was identified as an important base-load
power source in the Strategic Energy Plan of Japan, as approved by the Cabinet in
April 2014, nuclear safety remains the utmost priority for Japan. Japan will continue to
share with the international community the experience and lessons learned from the
Fukushima Daiichi accident.
The IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety has served as a significant
benchmark for further enhancing nuclear safety worldwide. Japan has been
continuously implementing and supporting the steady implementation of this Action
Plan and urges also other State parties to do so.

•

Mr Chairman,
The safe transport of radioactive material is another essential aspect of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy Japan has conducted the transport of nuclear
materials in strict conformity with international standards established by the relevant
international organizations and based on the right of freedom of maritime navigation
as provided for in international law. Japan also regards maintaining dialogue with
coastal States as extremely important in promoting mutual understanding. We will
continue to engage in confidence-building dialogue with coastal States.
Mr Chairman,
Japan regards the increasing number of contracting parties to the treaties and
conventions in the area of peaceful uses of nuclear energy as important
developments that contribute to the creation of more robust international legal
frameworks. In particular, the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for
Nuclear Damage (CSC) entered into force, after conclusion by Japan, on 15 April this
year. We believe this is a significant step forward in our joint effort to establish a global
nuclear liability regime. Moreover, nearly 50 countries, including Japan, ratified the
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material over the
past 5 years, although it has not entered into force yet. The adoption of the Vienna
Declaration on Nuclear Safety in February this year made an important step towards
enhancing the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. Japan continues
to encourage State parties to adhere to these international instruments and facilitate
the implementation in order to strengthen the relevant international legal frameworks.
Mr Chairman,
Last, but not least, Japan recognizes that education and public
communication play an important role in disseminating information to, and raising
awareness of the general public on the utility of the peaceful uses of nuclear science
and technology. Japan encourages all State parties, groups of countries and relevant
organizations to work towards this end.
Japan will continue to work together with the international community to make
every effort to promote and ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a safe,
secure and sustainable manner.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

