DELEGATION OF JAPAN TO THE CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT
3,chemin des Fins - P.O. Box 133 -1211 GENEVA 19- Switzerland
Tel. +41 (0) 2271.7 34 44 - Fax +41 (0) 227883818
Website: wyvw,disarm.emb-japan,goJp

(Please check against delivery)

Statement by H.E. Mr. Mari Amano
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Japan
to the Conference on Disarmament

Second Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
- Cluster III -

Geneva, 30 Apri12013

Mr. Chairman,
The peaceful use of nuclear energy is one of the three main pillars of the NPT,
together with the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons and the pursuit
of nuclear disarmament. As a country with almost no indigenous energy,
Japan has highly valued the benefits of nuclear energy and developed its
nuclear industry so diligently for over half a century.
Noting the benefits of peaceful use of nuclear energy, in this Cluster III, I would
like to stress the prosperity brought about through nuclear sciences and
applications to the world and the importance of international cooperation in this
field, and then wish to reiterate the importance to ensure so'called 38 in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy while touching upon Japan's policy on nuclear
power after the accident at the Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO)'s
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station (the Fukushima Daiichi accident).
Mr. Chairman,
The benefits of nuclear SCIences and applications for health and other
non'power areas such as cancer treatment, food, agriculture, water resources,
and protecting the environment have become well known today, and the
importance of enhanced access to and usage of these technologies are now
shared globally. Japan believes that international technical cooperation in those
areas plays a key role in achieving the goals outlined in the NPT.
Under the NPT, all States Parties enjoy the inalienable right to develop
research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination and in conformity with its Articles I, II and III. Japan
emphasizes the importance to promote international cooperation in this regard.
From this point of view, Japan highly commends that initiatives by the IAEA
Director General for promoting nuclear applications in such areas as cancer
diagnosis and treatment, water management, food security and safety, and
climate change, have produced tangible outcomes. Japan will remain a strong
partner in this field and continue to support strengthening the IAEA technical
cooperation program in assisting developing countries in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. Japan has consistently paid its financial share to the IAEA
1

Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF) in full since the foundation of the TCF.
Japan urges other IAEA Member States to do the same.
Japan also supports the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUr) ofthe IAEA. Japan has
been making a contribution of 3.5 million US dollars to the PUI every year since
2011 and intends to make a contribution of the same amount in the current
fiscal year. We encourage all countries in a position to do so to make
contributions to this valuable initiative.
Mr. Chairman,
Following the Fukushima Daiichi accident, Japan has made significant reforms
to its regulatory system for nuclear energy. With the strong determination
never to have an accident like the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster again, in
September 2012, the Nuclear Regulation Authority was founded to implement
safety regulations from an independent point of view, separating the regulatory
body from the administrative body in charge of promoting the use of nuclear
power. The Nuclear Regulation Authority will formulate new regulatory
requirements based on the lessons learned from the accident, continue to
improve the standards and ensure the country's nuclear safety.
Under the new administration, Japan will set out responsible energy policies
that take into account a range of the perspectives, including stable energy
supply and energy cost reduction, while fulfilling Japan's responsibilities for
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy towards the
international community.
Due to the high energy demand worldwide and the need to mitigate the carbon
emissions, the growth in nuclear power in the world, particularly in the
developing world, is still continuing. The latest estimation of the IAEA shows
that the world's installed nuclear power capacity will grow from 369 gigawatts
as of end of 2011 to 456 GW(e) in 2030 in low projection and 740 GW(e) in high
projection. It is clear that the nuclear energy remains one of the important
parts in the global energy portfolio.
In this context, reaffirming the significance of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, Japan looks forward to a success of the International Ministerial
2

Conference on Nuclear Power in the 21st Century to be held in Saint Petersburg,
Russian Federation in June this year. The Conference will be a great
opportunity for countries to discuss the uses of the nuclear power.
Mr. Chairman,
While noting the growing interests in developing nuclear power, we would like
to stress that international cooperation on safeguards, nuclear safety and
security-so called the "3S"-have become more important than ever.
Countries that benefit from the uses of nuclear power bear enormous
responsibilities for ensuring the 3S. The safeguards issues were discussed in the
Cluster II and here I will focus on safety and security.
The Fukushima Daiichi accident reminded us of the utmost importance of
nuclear safety. A variety of efforts have been made all over the world to
strengthen nuclear safety following the accident. Among them is the IAEA
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety which was unanimously adopted by the IAEA
General Conference in September 2011. The Action Plan will remain a
significant cornerstone in a continuous improvement of nuclear safety
worldwide. Japan commits itself to the implementation of the Action Plan and
encourages all countries to make every effort to address the issues identified in
the Action Plan.
Japan held the Fukushima Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety in
December 2012 in co-sponsorship with the IAEA. The Conference was to
provide yet another opportunity to share with the international community
further knowledge and lessons learned from the accident and to discuss the
progress of international efforts aimed at strengthening nuclear safety. We
believe that the conference contributed to strengthening nuclear safety
worldwide. Japan, as the country which has experienced the Fukushima Daiichi
accident, will continue to share knowledge and lessons learned from the
accident for further enhancement of nuclear safety worldwide.
The Fukushima Daiichi accident also reminded us of the importance of nuclear
security. From this viewpoint, the Government of Japan has amended the
relevant national regulations to translate into its national practice the most
updated recommendations on physical protection contained in the IAEA
3

INFCIRC/225/Rev.5 document, together with lessons derived from the
Fukushima Daiichi accident. In addition, the newly established Nuclear
Regulation Authority has been working to further enhance our nuclear security.
At the same time, for its contribution to the strengthening of global nuclear
security, Japan continues to provide further assistance to other countries
through activities of the "Integrated Support Center for Nuclear
Non'proliferation and Nuclear Security." Japan is also eager to contribute to
the success ofthe IAEAInternational Conference on Nuclear Security to be held
in Vienna in July this year and the Nuclear Security Summit to be held in The
Hague next March. In this regard, Japan recognizes that the Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material will bring
important changes to global nuclear security, and will accelerate the process to
conclude it.
Mr. Chairman,
Japan will continue to work together with the international community to make
every effort to promote and ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a safe
and sustainable manner.
Thank you.
II

4

