KAZAKHSTAN
Please, check against delivery

STATEMENT
by
Mr. Barlybay Sadykov
Ambassador-at-Large
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at Cluster 3 issues of the Third Preparatory Committee for the
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)

5 May 2014
New York

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
3 Dag Hammarskjold Plaza
305 East 47th Street, 3rd Floor, New York. NY I 0017
Tel. : (212) 230- 1900 • Fax (212) 230- 1172 • E-mail: kazakhstan@ un.int

Mr. Chairman,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

The Republic of Kazakhstan stands firm on the need to strengthen the
provisions of Article 4, which recognize the inalienable right of all NPT States
Parties to develop, research, produce, and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination. We believe that the signature of the IAEA Safeguards
Agreement and Additional Protocol, as well as the unequivocal trust of the
international community in a State's stated nuclear energy goals, must serve as
prerequisites for nuclear energy development.
Recently, we have seen a clear tendency towards increasing the importance
of the peaceful atom as a stable and efficient energy source. A number of countries
have begun construction of nuclear power plants. Other countries have also taken
their first steps to establish nuclear power programmes. According to some
estimates, about 30 countries have expressed interest in creating their own nuclear
power capabilities and Kazakhstan is one of them.
We believe that the international community, and especially the IAEA,
should assist nuclear newcomers in implementing their nuclear energy programmes
in a clear, predictable, technically-sound and safe manner. IAEA recommendations
for States that are considering constructing their first nuclear power plants and
research reactors are good starting point, and we urge IAEA to continue this work.
An equally important component of nuclear energy development is the
certainty that a State will be able to obtain the necessary nuclear fuel for its energy
needs in a predictable and sustainable manner. In this regard, we take note of
progress achieved in the implementation of Action 58 of the Plan of Action on the
development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the
possibility of creating guaranteed nuclear fuel supply mechanisms.
Any mechanism in the field of guaranteed nuclear fuel supply must be nonpoliticized and non-discriminatory. It should be made available to all States
adhering to their safeguards agreements. The delegation of Kazakhstan believes
that the transfer of nuclear materials should be driven by non-political criteria, and
be applied objectively, and in compliance with the provisions of the NPT.
On the basis of these principles, Kazakhstan has offered its territory for the
establishment of IAEA's Low-Enriched Uranium Bank. Kazakhstan and the
Agency are currently holding intensive negotiations on the text of the Host

Country Agreement and other relevant documents. It is our hope that this work will
be completed soon.
The delegation of Kazakhstan highly appreciates the effectiveness of the
IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), aimed at assisting the Agency's
Member States not only in developing their nuclear power potential, but also in the
areas of nuclear applications, such as food, water, nuclear medicine, and others. I
am convinced that the IAEA TCP should have adequate and sufficient funding and
be focused on the needs and requirements of developing countries.
Kazakhstan stands for further strengthening the role and authority of the
IAEA. We fully support the efforts of the Agency to implement a balanced and
clear regime of rules and standards for nuclear security.
We intend to continue to work closely with the IAEA on the Peaceful Uses
Initiative (PUI) and the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund. To this effect, Kazakhstan
has made a voluntary contribution of a sum of $100,000 to the PUI.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in fulfilling the provisions of
the NPT, Kazakhstan seeks to contribute to the achievement of the Treaty's noble
goals in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Thank you for your attention.

