As of April 28, 2017
Statement
by the Delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan
at the First Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2017 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons
Cluster 3 Specific Issue – Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and other Provisions
of the Treaty
Vienna, May10-12, 2017
Mr. Chair,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Republic of Kazakhstan stands firm on the need to strengthen the
provisions of Article 4, which recognizes the inalienable right of all NPT States
Parties to develop, research, produce, and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without any discrimination. We do believe that the IAEA Safeguards Agreement
and Additional Protocol, as well as the unequivocal trust among members of the
international community whose stated nuclear energy ambitions, must serve as
prerequisites for nuclear energy development.
Recently, we have seen an increasing need for peaceful atomic activity as a
stable and efficient energy source. We express our appreciation to the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the World Nuclear Association, and the International
Energy Agency for their endeavors in preparing reports on nuclear energy use
projections. The main conclusion drawn in these documents is that the accident at
the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan slowed down the development
of nuclear energy, but did not reverse it.
A testament to this is the fact that in July 2012 the United Arab Emirates
became the first country for the last 27 years to have begun construction of a nuclear
power plant. There are also a number of countries which have taken initial steps to
start their nuclear power programs. According to some estimates, about 30 states
around the globe expressed an interest in the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Kazakhstan is among these nations. As you are well aware, we have plans for
constructing a nuclear power plant in Kazakhstan in the future.
In this context, please note that Kazakhstan positively assesses the progress in
implementation of Actions 47 through 64 of the Action Plan adopted by the 2010
NPT Review Conference, related to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
At the same time, we are of a view that the dimension of the AP could be
strengthened by introducing some provisions with regard to special responsibilities
and the development of requirements and recommendations for states intended to
build nuclear power plants and research reactors. The latest IAEA recommendations
in this area can be used as a starting point.

2

We believe that the international community, especially the IAEA, should
assist nuclear newcomers in realization of their nuclear power programs in a clear,
predictable, technically-sound, and safe manner.
It is equally important that a state developing nuclear energy will be able to
obtain the necessary nuclear fuel for its energy needs in a predictable and
sustainable manner. In this regard we take note of progress achieved in the
implementation of Action 58 on the development of multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle, including the possibility of creating guaranteed nuclear fuel
supply mechanisms.
Any mechanism in the field of guaranteed nuclear fuel supply must be nonpoliticized and non-discriminatory. These materials should be available for all states
adhering to their safeguards agreements. Our delegation believes that the transfer of
nuclear materials should be driven by non-political criteria, and be applied
objectively and in compliance with the provisions of the NPT.
On the basis of these principles Kazakhstan supported the IAEA initiative to
establish Low enriched uranium Bank (LEU Bank). Our country offered its
territory for the IAEA LEU Bank. On August 27, 2015 in Astana the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan and the IAEA DG signed an agreement on the
establishment of the IAEA LEU Bank in Kazakhstan. On January 31, 2017 this
agreement entered into force. After commissioning a new building for the LEU
Bank, which is expected in August this year, the bank will be launched. We expect
the visit of DG Amano, together with a number of high officials from some
countries and international organizations to Astana for an opening ceremony of the
IAEA LEU Bank in Kazakhstan.
The delegation of Kazakhstan highly appreciates the effectiveness of the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, aimed at assisting Agency Member
States not only in developing their nuclear power potential, but also in such areas
of nuclear applications as agriculture, food and water security, nuclear medicine,
and others. I am convinced that the IAEA TC Programme will generate adequate
and sufficient funding and be focused on the needs and requirements of developing
countries. The IAEA’s Peaceful Uses Initiative, or PUI, is another important
component of the Agency’s activity, and States that exerted their support to it
thereby demonstrate their commitment not only to the NPT and the nuclear nonproliferation regime, but also to broader humanitarian objectives. Kazakhstan’s
contributions to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund and the Peaceful Use Initiative
have exceeded 1 million Euro. We plan to continue our support to the Agency in
order to facilitate the peaceful use of nuclear energy
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in fulfilling the provisions of
the NPT, Kazakhstan seeks to contribute to the achievement of the Treaty’s noble
goals in the area of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
I Thank you Mr. Chair.

