STATEMENT

BY

AMBASSADOR MICHAEL A.O. OYUGI, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA

AT THE

FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMIITEE FOR THE 2020
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATV REVIEW CONFERENCE
TH

VIENNA, 10

MAY 2017

ON

CLUSTER 3:
PEACEFUL USES OF ATOMIC ENERGY

1

Mr. Chairman ,

I take this opportunity to reaffirm Kenya's longstanding commitment to the objectives
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the three mutually
reinforcing pillars of the Treaty namely, nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Kenya reaffirms the inalienable right of all State Parties to the Treaty to develop
research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination and in accordance with the non-proliferation obligations of the Treaty.
We also recognize the integral role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. We note the centrality of the
promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the creation of the Agency and
throughout its history and recently, its role in development, including in the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SOGs) through its official motto
"Atoms for Peace and Development. "
My delegation welcomes the promotional activities of the Agency and the continued
focus on the peaceful uses of atomic energy in priority areas such as human health
and nutrition, food and agriculture, animal health and production, water resources
management, environmental protection, industrial applications and nuclear power.
These are key areas that have the potential to contribute to peace, health and
prosperity of peoples throughout the world and also playa role in contributing to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Mr. Chairman,

Kenya calls for the increase in the transfer and sharing of nuclear knowledge,
expertise and technology to developing countries including those in Africa so as to
contribute to the maximum benefit of peaceful uses of atomic energy to all countries.
In this regard, my delegation encourages the Agency to continue its efforts in terms
of technical assistance and capacity building, particularly for developing countries.
We also encourage the Agency to continue raising awareness, in all regions of the
world, of its important work in the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy,
its contribution to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, and the benefits
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In this regard , we welcome the fact that the
Agency, on the occasion of the commemoration of its 60th anniversary this year, is
organizing its first International Conference on Technical Cooperation later this
month in Vienna, the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in the United Arab
Emirates later in the year as well as the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear
Applications in 2018.

2

We further urge the Agency to continue to organize future periodic high level
Conferences raising awareness of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and the
resultant benefits, in all regions of the world, in accordance with the provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. Chairman,
Kenya welcomes the technical and financial support of the Agency to enhance
response capacities of Member States in the African region to respond to the
unprecedented outbreak of zoonotic diseases such as the Ebola Virus Disease
(EVD) including the Zika virus. The flexibility in response to the Ebola outbreak
highlights the Agency's integral role in providing emergency support to affected
countries using nuclear-derived diagnostic technology and also underscores the
importance of the Technical Cooperation Programme as the main statutory vehicle of
the Agency in accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world.
We urge the Agency, in accordance with its Statute and decisions of its policy
making organs, to continue to mobilize resources and seek partnerships with a view
to ensuring that the Agency's technical assistance projects and activities in the
promotion of peaceful uses of atomic energy, which are of vital importance to
developing countries, are financed and benefit State Parties.
Mr. Chairman,
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the notable progress, particularly in resource
mobilization realized to date, in the implementation of a key infrastructure project in
the Agency during the First Phase of Renovation of the Nuclear Sciences and
Applications Laboratories (ReNuAL) Project in Siebersdorf, Austria.
Kenya as a friend of the ReNuAL Project recognizes the important role the Nuclear
Sciences and Applications Laboratories continue to play in enhancing access,
transferring knowledge and scientific expertise and promoting the peaceful
applications of nuclear science and technology. The laboratories are also important
in the delivery of the Agency's Technical Cooperation Programme and in building
capacities of developing countries including those in Africa in the peaceful uses of
atomic energy in such key areas as plant breeding, soil nutrient and water
management, animal health & production and the sterile insect technique (SIT) for
malaria and tsetse management.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

3

