Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY MR. RAJA REZA RAJA ZAlB SHAH

REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA
AT THE DEBATE UNDER CLUSTER 3 (PEACEFUL USES) OF THE
FIRST SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEEE FOR THE 2015 REVIEW
CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATIONOF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS, VIENNA, 30 APRIL 11 MAY 2012

-

Mr. Chairman,
Malaysia would like to reiterate the importance it attaches to the inalienable right of all
States Parties to develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, without discrimination, as enshrined under Article IV of the Treaty. In this
context, Malaysia believes that it is the right of state parties to decide on and choose the
fields of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and their fuel cycle policies. Therefore, Malaysia
is of the view that no efforts or steps should be taken by any parties that could be
interpreted as affecting this right.
2.

Malaysia also believes that the contribution of atomic energy for peaceful purposes

could be realised through close international cooperation with the IAEA. In this regard,
Malaysia has always considered IAEA technical cooperation activities as essential in
pursuing these objectives. We believe that IAEA technical cooperation activities would
promote nuclear knowledge-sharing and the transfer of nuclear technology to developing
countries for the further enhancement of their scientific and technological capabilities,
which will contribute to their socio-economic development.

3.

The transfer of nuclear technology to states like Malaysia and the promotion of

peaceful applications of nuclear energy constitute a fundamental activity of the IAEA, as
emphasised in lNFClRCl267. Malaysia believes that the Agency must be equipped with
sufficient, assured and predictable resources to enable States pursuing peaceful uses of
nuclear energy to benefit from the transfer of nuclear technology without prejudice, and
taking into account the inalienable rights of States to such technologies.

e;

4.

In addition, the IAEA Technical Cooperation programme should continue to be

formulated and implemented in accordance with the IAEA's Statute and the agreed
guiding principles as contained in INFCIRC1267, as well as the decisions of the IAEA
policy making organs.

5.

Malaysia wishes to once again underline the need to respect the basic and

inalienable right of all Member States, as stipulated in the NPT, to develop research,
production and use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, without any discrimination
and in conformity with their legal obligations.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

