Thank you Mr. Chairman,
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned States Parties to the Treaty for the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) on the cluster of issues III on peaceful uses of nuclear technology. Although reference to this issue has been made in the NAM statement delivered during the General Debate, I wish to highlight some important points.
2.	NAM States Parties to the NPT again restate their principled position that it is the basic and inalienable right of all Member States to develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes as reaffirmed in Article IV of the NPT. NAM also underscores the high importance towards achieving the appropriate balance between the rights of Member States and of their obligations, as well as maintaining appropriate balance between the three main pillars of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) viz. technical cooperation, safety and verification.
3.	In this context, the role of the IAEA as an independent intergovernmental, science and technology-based organization, in the United Nations system, not only serves as the sole verification agency for nuclear safeguards but also the principal global focal point for nuclear technical cooperation.
4.	The IAEA assists developing Member States in planning for and use of nuclear science and technology for various peaceful purposes, especially in the context of achieving social and economic goals, including, inter alia, the generation of electricity, and also to facilitate the transfer of such technology and knowledge in a sustainable manner
5.	NAM wishes to recall that Articles II, III A-1, III A-2, III A-3JH A-4, 111 B o"' the IAEA Statute stipulate the rights of its Member States for the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes and to promote socio-economic development throughout the world by way of technical cooperation. Furthermore, Article III-A.2 refers to the development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful purpose, particularly the production of electric power with due consideration for needs of the developing countries of the world.
Mr. Chairman,
6.	Article IV of the NPT provides for the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and their right for technical cooperation among themselves or other international organizations keeping in view the needs of the developing areas of the world
7.	Nevertheless, NAM States Parties continue to note with concern that undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of material, equipment ard technology for peaceful purposes persist. NAM re-emphasises that proliferation concerns are best addressed through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory treaty-based agreements. Non-proliferation control arrangements should be internationally negotiated, transparent and open to participation by all States and should ensure that they do not impose restrictions on access to material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes required by developing countries for continued development
Mr. Chairman,
8. The IAEA, under its statutory obligations, pursues the goals of technical cooperation in peaceful applications of nuclear energy as one of the three pillars
of its activities. In order to meet the objectives of technical cooperation for peaceful purposes as enshrined in the Statute of the IAEA and in the NPT, the IAEA has to maintain the balance between the technical cooperation programme and other activities.
9.	All States Parties to the NPT Members of IAEA, pursuing the same goals of technical cooperation and peaceful application of atomic energy, have :o ensure that the technical cooperation programme remains firm and sustainable through adequate financial and human resources in an assured and predictable manner. We believe that the efficacy of the technical cooperation programme can best be ensured by the formulation of the programme and strategies strictly in accordance to the needs of the developing countries.
10.	NAM States Parties to the NPT also recall the statement by the IAEA Director General before the 47th Regular Session of the IAEA General Conference that the peaceful uses and applications of nuclear technologies has been increasing and will continue to be so in the future, based on the provisions of the IAEA.
11.	It is in this framework that NAM States Parties to the NPT Members of IAEA express their appreciation on the elements of the package proposal approved by the IAEA in 2003 and consider its necessary that strong commitment by ail concerned parties be demonstrated through actively pursuing the agreed elements of the package proposal relevant to technical cooperation and other measures.
12.	Finally Mr. Chairman, NAM believes that the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is one of the best ways to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.