MALAYSIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
(Please check against delivery)
STATEMENT BY DR. NORIAH JAMAL
DELEGATION OF MALAYSIA
MAIN COMMITTEE 3 OF THE 2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE TO THE TREATY
ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
NEW YORK, 5 MAY 2015

Mr. Chairman,
Let me at the outset congratulate you on your appointment as Chairman of Main
Committee 3 of the 2015 NPT Review Conference. My delegation places a high priority
on the work of this Committee, and we assure you of our full support. Malaysia
associates itself with the statement of the Non-Aligned Movement delivered by Iran.
Mr. Chairman,
2.
Malaysia reiterates the importance it attaches to the inalienable right of all States
Parties to develop, research, produce and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
without discrimination, as enshrined under Article IV of the Treaty. In this context,
Malaysia believes that it is the right of State Parties to determine their participation in
the fields of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Similarly, we believe that States Parties
also have to the right to decide on their fuel cycle policies. As such, no efforts or steps
should be taken by any parties that could be interpreted as affecting these rights.
3.
Malaysia also reaffirms our belief in the vital role played by the IAEA through its
Technical Cooperation Programme. We share the view with other developing states that
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme's resources should be sufficient, assured
and predictable, in order to ensure that all planned programmes can be implemented
effectively and efficiently.
4.
We would also add that the IAEA Technical Cooperation programme should
continue to be formulated and implemented in accordance with the IAEA's Statute and
the agreed guiding principles as contained in INFCIRC/267, as well as the decisions of
the IAEA policy making organs.
Mr. Chairman,
5.
Malaysia recognises that, as a recipient and contributor, the IAEA technical
cooperation activities have promoted nuclear knowledge-sharing and the transfer of
nuclear technology for the further enhancement of Malaysia's scientific and
rd

313 East 43 Street
New York, NY 10017

Tel: (212) 986 6310
Fax: (212) 490 8576

Email: mwnewyorkun@kln.gov.my
Website: www.un.int/malaysia

technological capabilities. In the long run, this would further benefit and contribute to our
socio-econom ic development.
6.
In this regard, we reaffirm our support for the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI)
programme, which aims to provide extra-budgetary funding in order to assist the
implementation of Technical Cooperation Projects. This programme also provides
prospects for partnerships amongst Member States on PUI-supported projects.
Malaysia would like to take this opportunity to record our appreciation to all the financial
contributors under the PUI, in particular Japan and the United States, for their
contribution to our programmes.
Mr. Chairman,
7.
Malaysia wishes to once again underline the need to respect the basic and
inalienable right of all States Parties, as stipulated in the NPT, to develop, research,
produce and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in
conformity with their legal obligations.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

2

