
1.	The Netherlands fully endorses the intervention made by the Presidency of the European Union. From a national perspective, we would like to add the following observations.
Mr. Chairman,
2.	The three pillars of the NPT are mutually reinforcing and intertwined. Yet each pillar faces its own challenges in today's security, political and technological environment. Article IV of the NPT establishes the inalienable right of signatories to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, in conformity with their non-proliferation obligations.
3.	Long term uncertainty over the availability and affordabiiity of fossil fuels has lead to a growing concern among states about their ability to meet the growing demand for energy. More and more states are considering the development of civil nuclear power as part of their national energy mix. With a 'nuclear renaissance* burgeoning, we face both new opportunities as well as challenges. We need to provide the IAEA with the necessary means to enable this multilateral organisation to materialize these opportunities and deal with the challenges.
4.	The Netherlands fully respects the right of every State to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. With rights also come responsibilities. Those responsibilities should be applied in a non-discriminatory manner; both by countries that are currently operating nuclear programmes as well as by countries that are starting or considering this path. We believe that it is of the greatest importance that the nuclear renaissance takes place with the best safety, security and non-proliferation guarantees that should be universally applied. This holds especially true for the nuclear fuel cycle. Enrichment related activities pose specific proliferation risks, which we should all seek to minimise. At the same time we must uphold States' rights under the NPT to have full access to the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
5.	Secure access to and supply of nuclear fuel is a key interest of states operating nuclear power programmes. If we are to assure that the development of nuclear power is consistent with the highest safety, security and non-proliferation standards, we must make certain that the issue of supply security is properly addressed. The Netherlands, with its advanced nuclear industry is actively engaged in the discussions on multilateral fuel supply mechanism with a view to increase energy security. To that end, among others, we organised together with Germany and the UK an international conference on 'Nuclear Fuel Supply: Challenges and Opportunities' in Berlin last year. The Netherlands remains committed to continue this useful dialogue with interested countries.
6.	The Netherlands warmly welcomes the role that the IAEA has played in promoting discussion on multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including nuclear fuel assurances. Director-General El Baradei has clearly laid out what he sees as the requirements or principles for an assurance of supply mechanism to work:
any such mechanism should be non-political, non-discriminatory and available to all States in compliance with their safeguards obligations;
any release of material should be determined by non-political criteria, established in advance and applied objectively and consistently;
no State should be required to give up its rights under the Non-Proliferation Treaty regarding any part of the nuclear fuel cycle.
Mr. Chairman,
7.	The Netherlands believes an overarching principle is required: Trust. Establishing and increasing trust would be an essential building-block for constructive progress. This holds true for both sides. Consumers need to trust the political and economic motives of supplier states, while suppliers must trust the intentions of potential customer states. We believe that building trust and confidence and working out multilateral nuclear approaches can go hand in hand and can mutually reinforce each other.
If we, suppliers and consumers, share the goal that the nuclear power renaissance is to take place in the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions, it is essential that we all take our mutual responsibilities seriously; it is essential to build trust; it is essential that we move forward.
Thank you.