At the outset let me congratulate you on your election as Chairman of Main Committee III. We assure you of our full support as you guide us in our work over the coming weeks.
The Netherlands fully endorses the statement made by the Presidency of the European Union. From a national perspective, we would like to add the following observations.
In an age of nuclear renaissance and advances in nuclear and medical sciences, the right to peaceful use of nuclear energy under article IV is essential. We support that right and have developed activities in that framework. This right comes with responsibilities and is closely interlinked with considerations of safeguards, safety and security and should be approached in a comprehensive manner.
In this regard, let me highlight two points.
Firstly, the Netherlands, as a country with enrichment capacities, takes a particular interest in the development of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle. These are insurance mechanisms that allow the nuclear fuel market to expand while simultaneously minimizing proliferation risks. We welcome the steps taken by the IAEA and Member States to start further work on the IAEA LEU-bank and the Bank in the Russian Federation.
However, the international discussion about MNA's is on-going and has yet to deliver tangible results. The Netherlands would like to see that the Review Conference will endorse the MNA process and encourages all states to remain engaged in the discussion. For its part, the Netherlands actively participates in the debate by introducing additional perspectives, for example from the industry.
Secondly, the work of the IAEA. The role of the Agency is fundamental in realizing, or helping States to realize, Art. IV rights and obligations. The Netherlands is a strong supporter of the Agency's Technical Cooperation Programme and its activities, in particular those which contribute to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals. We attach particular value to the support for the least developed countries.
Mi4. Chairman,
The technical cooperation programme allows for the development of civilian needs for nuclear energy and nuclear techniques, for instance for the treatment of diseases and nuclear research in the field of agriculture. This assistance, however, should be delivered under the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.
To conclude, contributions to the IAEA are crucial in these times of a nuclear renaissance. In that light we would like to reiterate that we have a firm tradition of paying our full share of the target for the Technical Cooperation Fund and we will continue to remain committed to a TCF that is adequately and predictably resourced. Nonetheless we also have to look at how we can get more mileage out of the funds available. The Netherlands stands ready to contribute to consultations on working towards this end.










Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



