
1.	The Netherlands fully endorses the intervention just made by the Presidency of the European Union. From a national perspective, we would like to add the following observations.
2.	As stated before under cluster I and II, this year's Preparatory Committee marks a very special anniversary: Forty years ago the NPT was opened for signature, and since that moment in July 1968, much has been achieved with regard to the three pillars of the treaty.
3.	The three pillars are intertwined, yet each faces its own challenges in today's security, political and technological environment. Article IV of the NPT establishes the inalienable right of signatories to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, in conformity with their non-proliferation obligations.
4.	Long term uncertainty over the availability and affordability of fossil fuels has lead to a growing concern among states about their ability to meet the growing demand for energy. Several states are considering the development of civil nuclear power as part of their national energy mix. At present there are approximately 440 nuclear power plants in the world, with 35 new reactors currently under construction and many more planned.
5.	The Netherlands fully respects the right of every State to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in accordance with the NPT. The Netherlands warmly welcomes the role that the IAEA has played in promoting discussion on multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, including nuclear fuel assurances. As the use of nuclear energy is inevitably linked to the threat of proliferation, it is of the greatest importance that this use is consistent with the highest non-proliferation standards. In this regard nuclear fuel cycle technologies pose specific proliferation risks, which we should seek to minimise, while continuing to uphold States' rights under the NPT.
6.	We understand that countries do not wish to renounce the possibility of developing fuel cycle activities themselves. They want to keep that option open. Therefore any scheme of nuclear fuel assurances should not ask States to do this. Nevertheless it is our opinion that
attractive alternatives should be presented, on a non-discriminatory basis, that could reduce proliferation risks whilst increasing energy security and reducing their costs. To date 12 proposals for guarantee schemes and the multilateralisation of nuclear fuel cycle activities have been put forward by different States. Any such scheme, not meant to impinge on national choices and arrangements in terms of energy solutions, would need to address in a satisfactory manner the following issues: proliferation resistance, assurance of supply, consistency with the equal rights and obligations paradigm and market neutrality.
Mr. Chairman,
7.	To provide a platform for informed and open discussion on the issues and options for nuclear fuel supply, the Netherlands together with the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland recently organised a two-day international conference on 'Nuclear Fuel Supply: Challenges and Opportunities' in Berlin, Germany. The Netherlands, Germany and the UK are cooperating together in supervising the joint industrial enterprise known as Urenco. Through Urenco our three countries have gained a unique experience in multilateral cooperation regarding fuel cycle activities in a way that honours the highest non-proliferation standards.
8.	The conference in Berlin was opened by IAEA Director General ElBaradei and brought together decision makers, technical experts and industry-representatives from countries that have recently expressed an interest in developing a nuclear energy programme, countries with nuclear power reactors without enrichment facilities as well as from uranium producing countries and countries party to the NPT with enrichment facilities. The discussions during the conference were open and frank and touched upon commercial, technical and political aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle.
9.	We now look forward to continue these discussions in a broader setting during the next IAEA Board of Governors meeting in Vienna in June. A report of the Berlin conference will be presented there and we hope that the discussions will continue in the same open and constructive manner.
10.	'Trust' is one of the key-ingredients for any multilateral approach to succeed. It is clear that among several States a lack of trust about both the motives as well as the content of the various proposals still exists. The Netherlands believes that the different proposals and the underlying issues need to be discussed further in an open, transparent and honest manner with all the parties involved. Discussions, such as those held in Berlin, can contribute to the building of trust among States and are necessary in order to make constructive progress towards a multilateral fuel supply scheme. The Netherlands sees a central role for the IAEA in this process.
11.	As stated recently by the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs, Maxime Verhagen, in a speech before the Atlantic Commission, the Netherlands attaches equal importance to all three pillars of the NPT. As the role of nuclear energy is increasing worldwide, the discussions on how the fuel cycle can be organised as safely as possible, that is, how to minimise the risks of proliferation without infringing on States' rights to their own fuel cycles, are evermore important. A solution must be found. In the words of Director-General ElBaradei; failure to do so, could lead to a dangerous setback, in which an increasing number of states would become nuclear weapon capable. The Netherlands is ready to continue to make its contribution in the discussions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.