check against delivery

Non-Proliferation Treaty – Review Conference 2015

Statement by Pieter-Henk Schroor, Deputy Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the UN Organisations in Vienna

Main Committee III

5 May 2015

Mr. Chairman,
Please allow me first of all to congratulate you on the assumption of your important role as chairman
of Main Committee III. As an active member of both the Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative (or NPDI) and the Vienna Group of 10 it goes without saying that we attach great
importance to a successful outcome of this review conference. You can count on our full support in
your endeavors to lead this Committee to tangible results.
The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement made by the representative of the EU. On a
national basis, I would like to make the following additional remarks.
The Netherlands fully recognizes the inalienable right of all States Parties to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy in conformity with articles I, II and III of the NPT. We
wholeheartedly agree with previous speakers who have stated that the Treaty provides a fundamental
and indispensable framework of confidence, establishing the necessary conditions under which
peaceful uses and the transfer of nuclear technology and knowledge can take place.
Mr. Chairman,
The Netherlands underlines the pivotal role of the IAEA in facilitating the peaceful use of nuclear
energy by States. The Netherlands is a strong supporter of the IAEA Technical Cooperation
Programme, which contributes to sustainable economic development, including the post-2015
sustainable development agenda. In this context we stress the need for the application of the
Agency’s safety standards and nuclear security guidelines in order to protect humankind and the
environment. We loyally pay our full target share to the Technical Cooperation Fund and intend to
continue to do so in the coming years.
In furthering technical cooperation the Netherlands attaches great importance to strengthening
nuclear security worldwide and to the commitment of all NPT States Parties to work together to
strengthen nuclear security, including by fully implementing relevant international requirements such
as UN Security Council Resolution 1540. Our most recent donation to the IAEA Nuclear Security
Fund, in addition to the EU contribution, amounted to 1 million Euros.
Through the organization of the Nuclear Security Summit in 2014 and by contributing to the
process of NSS2016, we are keeping the necessary high level political attention for this topic alive. We
support the IAEA’s central and coordinating role in the field of nuclear security, and highly appreciate
the Agency’s work in providing assistance to States’ efforts to ensure the security of their nuclear and
other radioactive material. We actively promote the universalization and entry into force of the
CPPNM 2005 Amendment, and, together with 34 other states, have expressed our commitment to
implement IAEA guidance in national rules and regulations. In this regard we believe that both the
VG10 working paper (NPT/CONF.2015/WP.1) and the NPDI Joint Working Paper
(NPT/CONF.2015/WP16) contain highly valuable recommendations, for instance to implement, in
conjunction with the IAEA, as appropriate, Integrated Nuclear Security Support Plans in order to
improve nuclear security at the national level and as a contribution to strengthening the global nuclear
security framework.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that this Conference will yield good results and we look forward to
working with you and other delegations in a positive and constructive way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

1

