Mr Chairman
May I join with others in congratulating you as you assume the chair of this important Committee.
New Zealand recognizes that all three pillars of the Treaty must be fully implemented. This encompasses the right of all States party to develop research, production and the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles 1,11 and III of the Treaty.
New Zealand acknowledges the many benefits that can come from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly in activities relating to food quality and safety, crop improvement, sustainable land and water management, pest control, water resources and access to fresh water, and in environmental management and health (including vaccine research and cancer therapy).
It is New Zealand's belief that nuclear non-proliferation, safety, security and waste management should be an integral part of the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We need to ensure that nuclear technologies remain accessible to all States party, while at the same time ensuring that such technologies are managed safely and securely, and do not contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Mr Chairman
New Zealand is of the view that multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle can provide a cost-effective and viable alternative to developing nuclear fuel cycle capabilities without affecting rights under the Treaty. Assurances should address real needs, including the back end of the fuel cycle, such as reprocessing, spent fuel and waste management as appropriate.
Safety and security issues must be an integral part of any discussion of multilateral approaches to the fuel cycle. In this context we consider that any assurance mechanism must be transparent, independent, inclusive, and applied in an equitable manner, using defined criteria, and come under the auspices and safeguards of the IAEA. Such mechanisms must allow for the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions. Any proposal for a multilateral fuel cycle mechanism should provide for effective physical protection of the associated nuclear material and facilities as well as the highest standards of nuclear, radiation and transport safety and waste management.
Mr Chairman
It is of paramount importance to maintain stringent standards of physical protection for nuclear material and nuclear facilities.
New Zealand acknowledges the primary responsibility of individual states for maintaining the safety of nuclear installations within their territories, or under their jurisdiction or control, and the crucial importance of an adequate national, technical, human and regulatory infrastructure in nuclear, radiation, transport and radioactive waste safety.
The IAEA has a hugely important role to play in efforts to improve the global nuclear security framework.
-We-welcome the Agency's work in developing the Nuclear Security Series and in supporting the efforts to combat illicit trafficking of nuclear materials and other radioactive substances. We support calls on all states to improve their national capabilities to detect, deter and disrupt illicit trafficking in nuclear materials throughout their territories, and on those states in a position to do so to work to enhance international partnerships and capacity building in this area.
New Zealand joins the call for all member states commissioning, constructing or planning nuclear power reactors, or considering nuclear power programmes, to become party to the Convention on Nuclear Safety. We also urge the voluntary application of the relevant provisions of the Convention to other nuclear installations dedicated to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as well as the application by member states of the IAEA's safety standards and codes to improve national nuclear radiation, transport and waste safety infrastructures.
Mr Chairman
It is essential that shipments of radioactive material adhere to the highest possible safety and security standards and that timely information on such shipments is provided. New Zealand would like to particularly emphasize the need for strengthening international co-operation with respect to the safe maritime and other transport of radioactive material.
We stress the importance of having in place effective and coherent nuclear liability mechanisms at the national and global levels to provide compensation for damage to people, property, and the environment, as well as actual or perceived economic loss, in the event of an accident or incident during the maritime transport of radioactive material. In this context we support the continued work of the International Experts Group on Nuclear Liability (INLEX), particularly in its effort to identify and address comprehensively gaps in the existing nuclear liability regimes.
New Zealand warmly welcomes the practice of some shipping States and operators of providing in timely manner information and responses to relevant coastal States in advance of shipments of radioactive materials for the purpose of addressing concerns regarding safety and security, including emergency preparedness.
We also appreciate the informal discussions on communication between shipping States and relevant coastal States with IAEA involvement, and the ongoing discussions at the bilateral level between relevant shipping and coastal states on issues of mutual concern.
Mr Chairman
These are the initial comments of my delegation on the issues to be discussed in this Committee. We look forward to exploring some of these matters further during the interactive discussions you have planned in these meetings.
Thank you Mr Chairman.













Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



