

Mr Chairman,
First allow me to congratulate you on assuming the Chair of Main Committee III. Sir, you may be sure that you will have the full cooperation of the New Zealand delegation in your challenging and important work.
As a non-nuclear country which has chosen not to develop a nuclear power industry, New Zealand is not a major participant in the exchange of technology available to NPT members under the terms of the Treaty.
New Zealand nonetheless recognises that the NPT membership agreed in 1995 in the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament", that it was important to ensure the right of parties to the Treaty to develop research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, II and III of the Treaty. We stand by that agreement, in particular to the preferential status that non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to the NPT should enjoy in such cooperation.
New Zealand's own contribution in helping to assist developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is channelled in particular through the Regional Cooperative Agreement for Asia and the Pacific. The RCA is proving a very useful conduit for technical cooperation between New Zealand and our regional neighbours. Most recently in this connection we were pleased to host in March a specialist training course under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We also cooperate with the Agency in providing training opportunities in areas where New Zealand has particular expertise.
Mr Chairman, a culture of nuclear safety is a prerequisite for international cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Paragraph 18 of the Principles and Objectives stresses the need for rigorous national measures and international cooperation. Well-publicised accounts of sometimes tragic accidents in nuclear installations and with respect to radiation sources over the last year demonstrate only too vividly the need for the highest safety standards and unwavering vigilance in the observation of them. The activities of the Agency in strengthening the global regime for nuclear, radiation, waste and transport safety are of crucial importance, and are to be commended highly.
One facet of the Agency's work to which New Zealand attaches special importance relates to its cooperation with States in assessing radiological conditions at former nuclear test sites. We especially welcomed the independent investigation carried out by an International Advisory Committee of eminent scientists under the auspices of the Agency on the environmental impact of nuclear testing at the atolls of Mururoa and Fangataufa in the South Pacific.
New Zealand is on one of the three routes along which pass at too regular intervals shipments of nuclear materials and radioactive waste. Such shipments are projected for many years into the future. They are a cause of continuing concern to New Zealanders, a concern shared by many other en route states. Taking into account the risks of an accident occurring and the consequences of such an accident, New Zealand protests these shipments whenever they occur. At the last Summit meeting South Pacific States clearly set forth their expectation that such shipments should be carried out in a manner which addresses all possible contingencies and the concerns of relevant countries, including coastal states of the region. Such shipments should be made only if the cargo is of demonstrably minimal risk, ships are of the highest standard and shipping states agree to promote the safety of the material and provide compensation for any industries harmed as a result of changes in the market value of the region's fisheries and tourism products in the event of an accident - even one where no nuclear damage takes place.
New Zealand is disappointed that the dialogue with South Pacific states on compensation and liability issues was suspended recently by the transport states - Japan, France and the United Kingdom. These talks were called to address the inadequacies of the current regime. We stand ready to re-engage at an early point.
New Zealand's own objective is a strong regime requiring prior notification and, ideally, prior informed consent procedures for the transboundary movement of radioactive materials and we have been working for the same in the IAEA and IMO. This Conference offers a further opportunity for the NPT parties affected by the shipment of such materials to join together to seek a regime which would provide stronger reassurance on the issues of safety, security, liability and compensation.
Mr Chairman, the very first of the 1995 Principles and Objectives calls upon all States not yet party to the Treaty, 179 members strong at that time, to accede to it at the earliest possible date, particularly those known to operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. All States parties to the Treaty were encouraged to make efforts to further this objective.
Five years later, another nine States have become members of the Treaty. We welcome Andorra, Angola, Brazil, Chile, Comoros, Djibouti, Oman, United Arab Emirates and Vanuatu. The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is almost, but not quite, universal.
Today, four States still remain outside the Treaty. In many other contexts, a 97 percent membership rate would be considered excellent. But this particular regime requires one hundred percent adherence if we are to ensure its non-proliferation goal. One State not party to the NPT operates unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. Another two States not party to the Treaty have exploded nuclear devices and operate unsafeguarded facilities.
Mr Chairman, New Zealand calls again upon those three States operating unsafeguarded facilities to accede to the NPT unconditionally as non-nuclear weapon states and to clearly and urgently reverse their pursuit of all nuclear weapons development or deployment, Moreover, we call upon them to refrain from any actions which would undermine regional and international peace and security and the efforts of the international community towards nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation.
Such a call, Mr Chairman, must be an important outcome of this Conference, and has to be addressed in our forward-looking work, whatever form that ultimately takes.
Our call for universality, of course, will be strengthened by the achievement of other successful outcomes at this Conference. This is an imperative. There is nothing like success to breed success. To argue convincingly for the benefits of belonging to the NPT to those who, unlike us, do not recognise them as self-evident, we must ensure the NPT is delivering on its non-proliferation and disarmament bargain.
The NPT is as indispensable as ever. And, we must leave in no doubt the expectations of the rest of the international community as a whole for those States presently outside the Treaty.

