Nigeria Country Statement at the PREPCOM, 2-12 May 2017, Vienna,
Austria
Cluster III Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and other Provisions
of the Treaty.
Thank you Chairman
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered under this cluster
by the delegation of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of Non Aligned
State Parties to the NPT. We also endorse the working paper by the Non
Aligned Movement State Parties on the “the inalienable right to peaceful
research, production and uses of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes”.
We endorse as well, the joint working paper submitted by the members
of the NPDI on peaceful uses and would like to make additional
comments in our national capacity.
2.
My delegation would like to once again underscore the uniqueness
and importance of the Non Proliferation Treaty. Besides serving as an
important cornerstone in global peace and security, the grand bargain of
the treaty which assures of the right of State Parties to pursue the use
of nuclear energy applications for their developmental aspirations make
the treaty a timeless and continually relevant instrument.
3.
In the recent years, more developing countries including Nigeria
are embracing nuclear technology to meet their developmental needs
including in important areas like Human and Animal Health, water
conservation, Agriculture and Power generation. This is as it should be;
indeed, peaceful uses are the only legitimate manner in which the
potential of the Nuclear should be applied.
4.
We reiterate that the right of all parties to this treaty to develop
research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination and in conformity with articles I and II of the
Treaty” as stipulated in Article IV, should continue to be respected and
deepened by the NPT community.
5.
The right to peaceful uses of Nuclear Energy is as inalienable as it
is a sovereign choice, however, once the choice is made, the necessity

for international cooperation cannot be over emphasised. In this regard,
my delegation highlights the valuable role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in providing support to Member States through the
Technical Cooperation Programme.
6.
My delegation is also aware of the huge level of support from
various Member States and donors whose continued support makes the
Technical Cooperation Programme and Peaceful Uses a reality. However,
the yawning gap could only be filled by concerted efforts towards more
technology transfer and accelerated programmes of capacity building
and cooperation.
Mr Chair
7.
My delegation believes that Nuclear Science and Technology could
play an important role as states strive to realize the targets of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Accordingly, we
urge all states to do all that they can to ensure that access to the
benefits made available by peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be
enlarged to the greatest extent possible.
8.
Nuclear Energy is clean, viable and environment and climate
friendly. Recalling the 2015 landmark Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, it is important to seek more cooperation in enabling access to
nuclear energy in the energy mix of interested countries as this would
conform not only with the relevant articles of the NPT but also further
the commitments of State Parties to the Paris Agreement.
9.
Like many other developing countries, Nigeria is not only faithful
to its obligations under the NPT, but also in compliance with its relevant
Safeguards obligations. Consequently, it is our expectation that the
concomitant right to peaceful uses without any form of inhibition or
conditionality would be fully respected.
10. On a final note, Disarmament and Non Proliferation are important
because they both seek to rid the world of nuclear weapons and thus
guarantee security by preventing catastrophic destruction of the peoples
of the world. However, it is the Peaceful Uses pillar that possesses the

inherent capability to accelerate the development and prosperity of the
World- thus guaranteeing in its own way, human socio economic
security and development.
11. Nigeria hopes that this first PREPCOM would begin to set the tone
that will lead to the review cycle coming up with clear concrete steps
measures that further preserve and facilitate the right of states to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Thank you Chair

