Mr. Chair,
Although Norway does not produce nuclear energy, Norway fully
recognizes the right to peaceful uses of nuclear technology enshrined in the
NPT. However, adherence to, and compliance with, the non-proliferation
and verification requirements of the NPT is a precondition for exercising
this right, and for cooperation in the field. The peaceful application of the
atom goes beyond the energy sector. Nuclear applications offer important
contributions to human health, food production, water management and
environmental monitoring. The IAEA plays an essential role in assisting
developing countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Norway also recognizes the importance of nuclear safety and security in all
peaceful nuclear activities and emphasizes that it is important for States
and international organizations to continue their efforts to enhance safety
and security measures for all fuel cycle activities. In this connection, we
commend the work of the IAEA in developing instruments, standards and
codes of conduct as guidance for ensuring the highest levels of safety and
security.
While recognizing the right of any State to decide upon its own energy
policy, we emphasize the need for States embarking on nuclear energy
programs

to

develop

adequate technical,

human

and

regulatory

infrastructure on a national level to ensure the safety and security of all fuel
cycle activities. This should be done in line with international standards,
guidelines and recommendations and from the very start of the process.
Furthermore, it is important for all States, in particular those with nuclear
fuel cycle activities, to become parties to all conventions and agreements

relevant to nuclear safety and security and to support the further
development of legally binding instruments to ensure a better global
nuclear safety and security framework.
Norway welcomes the recommendations and conclusions of the IAEA
Action Plan for Strengthening the International Preparedness and
Response System for Nuclear and Radiological Emergencies. We look
forward to continued efforts by the IAEA Secretariat and member states to
implement the strategy outlined in the final report of the Plan. Norway also
endorses the conclusions of the International Conference on the Safe and
Secure Transport of Radioactive Materials, hosted by the IAEA in October
2011.
The accident a t Fukushima, following the devastating earthquake and
tsunami in Japan in March 2011, has slowed down the expansion of nuclear
power development globally. Still, it is expected that the use of nuclear
energy will grow in the coming years. The international community must
ensure that more production and use of nuclear energy will not undermine
the non-proliferation regime, o r harm human safety and the environment.
We believe this is possible. In this respect Norway highly welcomes the
International Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, which was requested by the
Ministerial Conference in June 2011 and adopted by the IAEA General
Conference in September 201 1. Norway supports the IAEA's pivotal role in
implementing the Action Plan, but recognises that the responsibility of
implementation remains with the member states. We also look forward to
the Fukushima Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, to be hosted by
the Government of Japan in co-sponsorship with the IAEA, in Fukushima
Prefecture in December 2012.

Mr. Chair,
Norway supports the effective implementation of the work plan adopted by
the 2010 Washington

Nuclear

Security Summit, and

encourages

participating States to effectively follow up the outcomes of the 2012 Seoul
Nuclear Security Summit. We look forward to work closely with the
Netherlands as host of the 2014 Summit. Norway strongly supports the role
and the work of the IAEA as the key international organisation in the field
of nuclear security.
Norway contributed in 2010 with 2,5 million Euro to the Nuclear Security
Fund, and announced a t the Summit in SeouI that we will increase our
support to the Fund with an additional 1 million Euro. The IAEA must a t
any time be given the necessary resources to fulfil this task.
The concept of multilateral approaches to nuclear fuel cycles represents an
important avenue to reconcile peaceful uses with global non-proliferation
concerns. Norway therefore welcomes the decisions made by the IAEA
related to assurances of supply, including not least the establishment of the
IAEA's own LEU bank.
The conversion of military stocks represents one way of ensuring access of
nuclear fuel to power plants. This is an interesting example of the
implementation of Article VI on nuclear disarmament supporting the
implementation of Article IV on peaceful uses.
Another way to accommodate non-proliferation concerns while pursuing
peaceful nuclear applications is by minimising the use of highly enriched
uranium. In the production of isotopes and in research reactors, it has been
demonstrated in a great number of cases that conversion to low enriched
uranium is possible both technically and financially. In this connection I
will again refer to the Working Paper submitted by Norway and Austria on

the findings from the Second International Symposium on Minimization of
Highly Enriched Uranium.

Norway encourages the IAEA to support

voluntary conversion projects.
M r Chairman,
A sustainable application of Article IV requires a broad partnership, both
between countries and by finding solutions that also accomodate
disarmament and non-proliferation concerns. A strengthened IAEA should
continue to be a t the centre of our efforts.
Thank you for your attention.

