Mr. Chair,
Like other speakers, Norway would like to stress that it is the inalienable right of all State Parties to the NPT to develop research, production, and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, II and III of the Treaty.
As Norway has aligned itself with a number of working papers which address the peaceful uses pillar of the NPT, I will highlight some issues of particular concern to Norway.
Mr. Chair,
There has been too much emphasis on the possible constraining nature of much needed non- proliferation steps. A prominent example is the current discussion on possible international cooperative efforts on the nuclear fuel cycle.
From our perspective the development of fuel assurances provides a possibility for potential newcomers in nuclear energy to harness the benefits of this energy source without having to make costly investments in fuel production. Fuel cooperative arrangements such as the ones proposed by the Russian Federation and Germany represent a way of reconciling enhanced
peaceful uses with collective non-proliferation concerns. Considering the important role of the IAEA in this regard, Norway has contributed 5 million USD to the IAEA fuel bank initiative.
Mr. Chair,
While it is the right of each country to determine its own energy mix, the nuclear renaissance will pose challenges to both our non-proliferation regime, to human safety and to the environment.
It is thus imperative that any country pursuing nuclear energy production applies the highest security and safety standards, and upholds its non-proliferation obligations.
Norway urges all States Parties to sign, ratify and implement the Amended Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and nuclear facilities, the Convention on the Suppression of Nuclear Terrorism, the Convention on Nuclear Safety, as well as other relevant IAEA instruments. The Agency plays a key normative role in this area.
Transport of nuclear material must also be accorded our full attention. This becomes even more important as international cooperation on the front and back end of the fuel cycle is being encouraged. The dialogue between concerned states, in particular between coastal states and shipping states, must continue to ensure safe and secure transport.
This conference should confirm the fundamental security and safety principles set by the IAEA. I would like to reiterate Norway's core message in the Main Committee II - that implementation of non-proliferation measures such as the IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards and the Additional Protocol will foster confidence and facilitate the full implementation of NPT's Article IV.
Civilian nuclear cooperation is more than nuclear energy. A large part of IAEA's technical cooperation concerns peaceful nuclear applications relevant to the improvement of health, food security, water management and environmental monitoring. IAEA is thus an important partner in meeting development objectives.
This conference should confirm the full support of IAEA's technical cooperation program and ensure sufficient, predictable and sustainable financial resources.
Implementation of the non-proliferation commitments must be a precondition for cooperation and assistance in the area of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Nuclear security must similarly be strengthened. Norway is convinced that continued minimization of HEU in the civilian sector is an important measure for increasing the trust and confidence needed to facilitate further cooperation in civilian nuclear technology. This should be reflected in the final outcome of this review conference.
The conversion of military stocks of HEU to fuel for civilian reactors represents an important inter-linkage between the nuclear disarmament and the peaceful uses pillars of the NPT. This process should be accelerated as more military stocks are brought under IAEA safeguards.









Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



