
Mr. Chairman, 
On behalf of the Norwegian Delegation, I have the honour to take the floor to present the Norwegian position on the question of nuclear export control. Since it is the first time I take the floor, I would like to congratulate you on assuming the Chair of Main Committee III. The Norwegian Delegation looks forward to working with you in a constructive and co-operative manner during this Conference. 
As a State Party to the NPT, Norway feels strongly committed to the nuclear non-proliferation obligations as mandated in Article III.2. The NPT Exporters Committee, later known as the Zangger Committee, has since its inception in 1971 established a common understanding on how to implement Article III.2 with a view to ensure consistent interpretation of the obligations from that Article. As a member of the Zangger Committee, Norway implements the basic understandings of the Committee in its national export control policy. We urge other countries not members of the Zangger Committee to adopt the Trigger List and the Full-Scope Safeguards as a minimum requirement in their national export control system. 
Article III.2 has certain limitations as it inter alia does not include "technology, dual-use items and nor does it explicitly require fullscope safeguards as a condition of supply. With a view to better serving nuclear non-proliferation efforts, Norway has joined the Nuclear Suppliers Group. The NSG is not an internationally legally binding agreement; however, it is a collective policy agreement of the member states. The NSG Guidelines and control lists form the basis for Norway's nuclear export control system and we are strongly committed to the requirement of IAEA Full Scope Safeguards as a condition of supply to reduce the risk of diversion of nuclear transfers to unsafeguarded nuclear explosive activities. 
Paragraph 17 of the "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament adopted at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference stated that transparency in nuclear-related export controls should be promoted within the framework of dialogue and co-operation among all interested States party to the Treaty. Since 1995, the NSG has, in addition to its ongoing outreach activities and regular contacts with a number of countries, strengthened their dialogue with non-members. The NSG organised international seminars in 1997 and 1999 on the role of export controls in nuclear non-proliferation. Norway has, and will continue to actively support transparency within the framework of dialogue and cooperation. Our view is that transparent harmonization of national export control policies will provide an environment of confidence for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Together with Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Sweden, Norway has submitted separate working papers to Main Committees II and III on these questions. 

