NEW ZEALAND
Statement by

H.E. Nicole Roberton
Permanent Representative, Vienna

at the

2017 Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

Cluster III

Vienna, May 2017

Mr Chair
Like other NPT states, New Zealand contributes to and benefits from advances
in nuclear science in a number of areas including agriculture, human health
and environmental management.

It is New Zealand's view that the IAEA's

Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUll has a key role to play and we have been pleased
to support a number of projects through the PUI, such as monitoring
radioactivity in the marine environment from the Fukushima accident and
responding to sustained drought in the Sahel region. We also play an active
part in projects under the auspices of the IAEA Regional Collective Agreement
in the Asia-Pacific region.
While we have decided not to include nuclear power in our own energy mix,
we nevertheless recognise the right of State Parties to the NPT to use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes under Article IV of the Treaty. Here I would like
to underscore that New Zealand is equally firm in its view that all countries
developing and using nuclear technology must apply the highest standards of
safeguards, safety and security, including during transport and waste
management.

In March 2017, New Zealand's new Radiation Safety Act

entered into force, enabling us to more effectively meet our own international
obligations relating to radiation protection, safety, security and nuclea r nonproliferation.
Mr Chair
It is now six years since the tragic accident at the Fukushima Nuclear Power
Plant. For New Zealand, and many of our regional neighbours, the accident
reinforced the importance of continued vigilance and transparency on nuclear
safety issues.

It also clearly demonstrated that nuclear accidents do not

respect national boundaries. This would be particularly true for an accident
occurring during the maritime transport of nuclear material.
New Zealand continues to actively promote the safe transport of radioactive
material, at the IAEA and other relevant forums. We are strongly of the view,
Mr Chair, that it is essential that those transporting radioactive material adopt
and apply the highest possible safety standards, and that coastal and other
interested States receive notification in advance of shipments. New Zealand
was pleased to join a number of coastal and shipping states at the IAEA in

agreeing voluntary best practice gUidelines on communication to apply to
certain shipments of radioactive material. We look forward to participating in
a second table-top exercise to test these guidelines, to take place in Lisbon
next month. We also welcome efforts to improve the international nuclear
liability regime and will continue to work with others to ensure the concerns of
non-nuclear coastal states are taken into account.
Mr Chair
New Zealand remains committed to strengthening nuclear security.
potential humanitarian, economic and

The

environmental consequences of

terrorists gaining access to nuclear or radioactive materials are so grave, that
the New Zealand Government is doing all within its power to minimise the
possibility of this nightmare becoming a reality. In our view, the Agency's work
on nuclear security is indispensable, including for states like New Zealand with
small quantities of nuclear and radioactive material. We commend the IAEA's
IPPAS missions as a valuable tool to provide helpful and pragmatic assistance
for securing nuclear and radioactive material. We call on all states to maintain
at all times effective security of all nuclear and other radioactive material,
including the 85% of material used for non-civilian purposes.
Mr Chair
In closing, New Zealand recalls the Vienna Group of Ten statement and
working paper and commends the Group's set of recommendations for your
attention when addressing the 'Vienna issues.'
Thank you Mr Chair.

<>

