PHILIPPINES
Statement
H.E. Ambassador Lourdes 0. Yparraguirre
Permanent Representative to the
UN and Other International Organizations in Vienna
CLUSTER 3 ISSUES
09 May 2012, Vienna
First Preparatory Committee Meeting of the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Vienna, Austria

Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines associates itself with the statement delivered by Egypt on
behalf of the NAM States parties to the NPT.
Since the 2010 NPT Review Conference, significant developments in the
area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy have allowed us to move forward in
implementing the Action Points under this cluster.
The IAEA continued to play an important role in helping countries achieve
their Millennium Development Goals through its Technical Cooperation
Programme and various activities in nuclear applications, despite limited
resources and the growing number of requests for assistance from developing
Member States. The Philippines places paramount importance in the IAEA TC
Program, which constitute the main statutory vehicle for transferring nuclear
technology to developing countries, and express support for all efforts aimed at
enhancing its efficiency and effectiveness.

However, this cannot be fully

achieved if we fail to ensure that the Agency's resources for technical
cooperation activities are sufficient, assured and predictable.

IAEA Member

States should, therefore, exercise political will and show commitment to finally
addressing this long-standing issue.
We welcome the commitment of the IAEA Director General to highlight the
Agency's promotional activities, pursuant to its mandate under Article 2 of its
Statute, in addressing basic human needs, including in the areas of human
health, food and nutrition, agriculture and the environment.

This generates

global recognition of the role of peaceful uses of nuclear technology in various
non-power applications that help countries achieve their socio-economic
development goals.
The Philippines also acknowledges the support being provided by the
IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) in providing extra-budgetary support to
enable the implementation of unfunded TC projects. The Philippines believes
that the PUI serves as a useful mechanism through which the IAEA's role in the
promotion of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy may be further
enhanced, while assisting States such as the Philippines that are committed to
their non-proliferation obligations realize their development goals. We welcome
the announcements made this morning of additional contributions, and urge
States in a position to do so to likewise contribute to this worthwhile initiative.
The IAEA Secretariat should also exercise transparency in the management of
PUI, with primary consideration being placed on the requests and priorities of
Member States.
Mr. Chairman,
The Philippines believes that the inalienable right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy enshrined in Article IV of the Treaty
necessarily comes with concomitant responsibilities. We stress the importance
of nuclear safety and nuclear security in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

The events of the past year presented significant challenges to the work of
the IAEA. The Fukushima nuclear accident shook the international community's
perceptions of nuclear power, including the safety of existing power plants and
new facilities proposed to be built. It also compelled a number of countries,
including the Philippines, to rethink their respective national positions on nuclear
power.
However, as oil prices continue to soar and concerns over climate change
persist, interest in nuclear power remains and countries continue to turn to the
IAEA for assistance in the development or expansion of their national nuclear
power programs. While presenting challenges, the Fukushima accident also
posed great opportunities to discuss ways for improving the Agency's work in
nuclear safety.

Confidence in the use of nuclear energy hinges on the

continuous improvement and strengthening of nuclear safety.
The IAEA plays a unique and central role in promoting international
cooperation in nuclear safety and is well-placed in responding to the requests of
its Member States for assistance in the development of a safety infrastructure for
a nuclear power program. We believe that the IAEA should continue to provide
assistance to countries such as the Philippines that are still considering the
inclusion of nuclear power in its energy mix, particularly in the development of a
regulatory framework, capacity-building, and the management of radioactive
waste.
In the coming year, we believe that IAEA Member States should build
further on the implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety that was
adopted by the IAEA General Conference last year.

These include greater

commitment to IAEA Safety Standards, reviewing global frameworks for
emergency preparedness and response, utilization of knowledge networks and
enhanced regional cooperation.

For its part, the Philippines is in the process of undertaking its domestic
legal procedures for the ratification of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the
Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management, as called for in Action 59 of the Final
Document. Once realized, this will be our contribution to the strengthening of the
global safety regulatory framework.
On nuclear security, we believe that IAEA Member States should
endeavor to implement best practices and recommendations as contained in the
IAEA Nuclear Security Guidelines principles in maintaining the security of nuclear
installations and facilities, as well as nuclear and radioactive materials in situ or
in transport.
We are in the process of amending our national legislation to enable us to
accede to the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism.
Outside of the I A W , we also work with our bilateral partners, such as
through the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, the Global Threat
Reduction Initiative, the US Department of Energy Megaports Initiative Project
and the EU Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy framework, to
enable us to further strengthen our national nuclear security framework. The
Philippines was also one of the Participating States in the 2012 Nuclear Security
Summit hosted by the Republic of Korea last March. While fully endorsing the
NSS process and outcome, we believe that NSS Participating States should now
focus on finding ways to derive wider, if not universal, endorsement of the
outcomes of its meetings, as this would greatly support the enhancement of
nuclear security worldwide.
Thank you, Mister Chairman.

