PHILIPPINES
- PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
Main Committee III (Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy)
2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
05 May 2015
United Nations, New York

Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the Philippine delegation, please allow me to congratulate
you on your appointment as Chairman of Main Committee III. We assure you of
our full support and cooperation in our efforts to arrive at a consensus on the
specific issues under this Committee.
The Philippines associates itself with the statement delivered by Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
As contained in Article IV of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the
Philippines reaffirms the inalienable right of States Parties to the development,
research, production and use of nuclear energy without discrimination.
At the heart of the implementation of Article IV is the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) which is mandated to seek to accelerate and enlarge the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the
world.
Over the years, the Philippines and other Member States have benefitted
from close partnership and cooperation with the Agency through national and
regional projects that apply nuclear and isotopic techniques geared towards
improving agricultural productivity, enhancing industry competitiveness, securing
a safe and clean environment through water resource management and marine
pollution control, providing quality healthcare including in the fight against cancer,
and ensuring nuclear safety and security.
For the past two years alone, the IAEA has assisted the Philippines on six
projects that are focused on the need to enhance national capability for
radiological preparedness and response and planning and infrastructure
development for radioactive waste management.
PHILIPPINE MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

556

FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY

10036 •

TEL.

(212) 764-1300 •

FAX

(212) 840-8602

The programme also included industrial applications of radioisotope
techniques, enhancing safety of gamma radiation facility, application of isotope
hydrology techniques for water resource conservation and management, as well
as increasing capability for extraction of uranium and useful commodities from
phosphoric acid .
There are nine more proposed projects with the Agency in the pipeline for
the next two years. These projects reflect the Philippines' continued efforts
towards increasing further the potential contribution of nuclear science and
technology in key areas of national socio-economic development, including
research reactor technologies, health, sterile insect techniques, radiopharmacy
applications, harmful algal blooms and assessing the feasibility of developing a
nuclear power programme.
The Philippines is also a regular recipient of fellowships , scientific visits,
consultancy grants, expert missions , training course/workshop grants, grants for
participation in international conferences/symposia/workshops, grants to
participate in research coordination and scientific/technical committee meetings,
and grants for research contracts.
There is no question on what the Agency could do in tandem with Member
States. It is for this reason that the Philippines will continue to call on
strengthening the IAEA's technical cooperation programme in this Review
Conference.
The Philippines acknowledges the support being provided by the IAEA
Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) in providing extra-budgetary resources that allow
the Agency to implement additional projects for Member States in the peaceful
applications of nuclear technology. The Philippines believes that the PUI
enhances the Agency's ability to fulfill its statutory responsibilities, and to
respond to Member States' needs and realize their development goals.
In particular, the Philippines acknowledges the support provided by the
PUI in projects such as the IAEA's Water Availability Enhancement Initiative
(iWAVE) project.
We encourage Member States in a position to do so to contribute to this
important initiative.
While we speak of rights, we must also emphasize responsibilities. We
call on States Parties to strictly comply with their obligations on non-proliferation
and to work for the continued strengthening of the IAEA's safeguards and
verification regime.

The Philippines strongly supports the global nuclear safety regime,
through the efficient and effective implementation of international legal
instruments, the development of safety standards, enhancement of national
safety infrastructure, coordination of international emergency preparedness and
response mechanisms, and the promotion of a nuclear safety culture.
The Philippine commitment to strengthen nuclear security stems from the
recognition that nuclear security, along with nuclear safety, is integral to the
continued development and enjoyment of the benefits of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. A National Nuclear Security Support Centre is being established in my
country, with the assistance of the IAEA in support of the National Nuclear
Security Plan.
Finally, the Philippines lends its support to multilateral approaches to the
nuclear fuel cycle with the IAEA in the leading role. As we have time and again
stated, States stand to benefit the most under a multilateral framework as this will
provide options for the assurance of supply and services for nuclear facilities
while at the same time serving as an important tool for strengthening the nonproliferation regime.
Thank you.

