Philippine Intervention on Cluster 3

Thank you Mr. Chairman, the Philippines associates itself with the statement
delivered by Indonesia on behalf of the NAM.
On the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Philippines agrees with other
delegations that this is indeed a right, but it is a right that comes with significant
responsibilities. States need to ensure that nuclear programs and whatever
technical asSistance they receive as State Party to the NPT are used for peaceful
purposes only.
'
The Philippines recognizes the importance of the IAEA Technical Cooperation
program, which constitutes the main statutory vehicle for transferring nuclear
. technology to developing countries and we express support for all efforts aimed
at enhancing efficiency and effectiveness. However, this cannot be achieved if
we fail to ensure that the Agency's resources for technical cooperation activities
are sufficient, assured, and predictable. IAEA Member States should, therefore,
exercise political will and show commitment.in addressing this issue.
The Philippines values the role of nuclear technology in food security and safety,
nutrition and human health including disease prevention and control,
environmental protection, water resource management as well as the use of
radioisotopes and radiation. These are the areas where nuclear and isotopic
techniques are beneficial in supporting socio-economic development in many
countries. The IAEA has a leading role in the promotion of these techniques
among interested Member States. We encourage further demand driven projects
that address the needs of Member States.
The IAEA Nuclear Technology Review 2012 provides a comprehensive and
useful update on the progress achieved in 2012 in the areas of nuclear power
and nuclear applications as well as highlights the need to increase the transfer of
nuclear technology and the sharing of nuclear knowledge to developing
countries, to enhance their capabilities and maximize the benefit of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. We encourage the IAEA to continue providing training
and education, supporting national laboratories and further enhancing
coordinated research activities.
.
The IAEA should also continue assisting interested Member States in analyzing
energy options and to prepare for the introduction of nuclear power or uranium
production, while maintaining its role as the leading vehicle for promoting the
transfer and development of technology and knowledge related to all peaceful
nuclear applications, including nuclear power and the nuclear fuel cycle.

As interest in nuclear energy remains, the IAEA should continue to provide
support for regulatory infrastructure and human resource development in
Member States introducing nuclear power or expanding their programs, upon
request.
The Philippines emphasizes that the IAEA should remain committed to the
implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, including following through
with specific measures for the strengthening of nuclear safety, and calis on all
Member States to enhance their political and financial support to the Agency's
programs that would support its early implementation.
All States should endeavor to implement best practices and recommendations as
contained in the IAEA Nuclear Security Guidelines prinCiples, in maintaining the
security of nuclear installations and facilities, as well as .nuclear and radioactive
materials in place or in transport.
I thank you Mr. Chairman.

