Mr. Chairman, at the very outset of my intervention I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the chairmanship of this very important Committee.
Poland fully associates itself with the statement made by Spain on behalf of the European Union.
In my statement I would like to share some information on the development of nuclear power program in Poland.
Introduction
The improvement of nuclear safety and security standards, at the international and the national level should be considered within the framework of economic and technological development. One of the most significant benefits of this is the global renaissance of nuclear power, reflected in the growing interest of many countries worldwide.
Soon, a group of over 30 countries with nuclear power plants will be joined by next group of adopters. The investment boom in Asia, as well as presently developed and planned investments across Europe and worldwide encourage us to believe that nuclear energy development should be considered as a worthwhile effort to undertake.
By recognizing the value of the global revival of the nuclear energy, the Polish Government made a decision to launch the nuclear power program last year. This decision was made mainly for energy security reasons, to ensure power supply at rational costs, respecting at the same time the environment protection requirements. This is connected with taking efforts to prepare an appropriate regulations encouraging such investments, including a long term vision of nuclear power sector.
Thank you for this remarkable opportunity enabling me to present the current status of this work in Poland on this distinguished forum.
NPPP objectives
Our objective to start up the operation of the first nuclear power reactor around 2020 was the result of the challenging situation of the power sector and its obligations to meet international targets set by the EU climate-energy package. For the power sector the already approved document "National Energy policy up to 2030" sets the following goals:
firstly, to assure long-term security of electricity supply, among others by diversification of energy sources
- secondly, to maintain electricity prices at levels acceptable to the national economy and the society;
thirdly, by reducing emission of S02, NOx, and C02
and last but not least by increasing the share of RES in the final energy mix to levels defined by EU requirements.
The selection of the nuclear power gives us the possibility of meeting our sustainable development commitments and will have a potentially great economic and social impact for the domestic power industry and the entire economy.
Some important decision already taken by the Polish Government have created a legal framework for preparation and implementation of the Nuclear Power Program.
NPPP tasks
The construction of Nuclear Power Plants should be considered as the greatest challenge in the history of the Polish energy market and the post war economy.
Bearing in mind that road from taking the decision to launch the Nuclear power Program to the start up the operation of the first Nuclear power plant is rather long and winding - we are aware that only the proper preparation will lead us to satisfactory results. Another words, skillful and effective navigation is required to reach that goal in the shortest possible time, while allowing no shortcuts. But to smoothly overcome all obstacles and traps, the necessary preparatory stage must be tackled with more conviction and effectiveness than we have managed so far.
Therefore, today we concentrate on two blocks of activities:
First one is to elaborate the Nuclear Power Program. The main objectives of this Program will be to define an optimal scope of nuclear power development in the present and in the foreseeable future, to prepare the list and schedule of activities for the government administration and for the investor. Another important objective will be to determine costs of implementation of the program. The final approval of the Program by the Council of Ministers will require however extensive consultation and a public debate.
The second important task is building necessary infrastructure: regulatory and institutional. The model of functioning of the nuclear power sector elaborated recently - comprises a complete construction cycle for nuclear power plant, its safe, secure and efficient operation, the decommissioning phase, including the spent fuel and radioactive waste management. Speaking of regulations I have in mind especially nuclear safety and radiological protection as well as institutional infrastructure whose duty will be to ensure coherence and stability of the nuclear power development.Another important field of our activity is the educating of a highly qualified staff for nuclear power sector. Nowadays, more than ever it is so clear that nuclear power is intimately linked with high technology, thus highly qualified human resources are required;
Information and education campaign
Improving public acceptance of nuclear energy will be also a huge challenge for the government and local administration, although the latest results of pools show growing support for nuclear energy among the Polish population. Luckily, also the local authorities are becoming increasingly respective to the construction of NPPs in their communities as they become aware of the many advantages of such investments. Generally, they expect a boost of the local economy, especially reduction of an unemployment.
The public acceptance will depend very much on the scope of information provided by presenting all aspects of energy supply, particularly the consequences of not going nuclear when the coal based energy becomes extremely costly because of its ecological impact, especially when external costs are considered.
3. I would like to inform you that the Investor - the biggest electricity producer in Poland PGE - the Polish Power Group has declared its interest in the development of nuclear power sector and has already started its preparatory works for future investment aimed at the selection of the experienced co-investor, selection of nuclear technology and providing financing for the first NPP
Only this kind of systematic approach to nuclear investments may determine the success of the whole program.
Regulations
The model of functioning of the nuclear power sector already elaborated necessitates the preparation of regulations for the entire life of the nuclear power sector.
New regulations should describe duties and rights of all institutions and organizations fully or partially dedicated to the Nuclear power program ensuring at the same time the competent and effective cooperation.
The basic principles of new Polish regulations are aimed at the ensuring the following conditions:
the separation of regulatory functions from promotion and coordination functions
the transparency of ail activities
the preservation of a safety culture at each stage
of activities.
Therefore we are drafting a package of laws applicable to the nuclear power sector. International Cooperation
Please, let me take this opportunity to say that all preparatory work facilitating the implementation of the Nuclear Power Program for Poland are being conducted in full observance of international law, EU regulations and in accordance with relevant guidelines and recommendations of IAEA.
Being on the threshold of nuclear power development in Poland, we are convinced that such a formidable challenge require a support of international organizations having an expertise and experience illustrated by a wide range of standards, guidance and recommendations and, what is even the most important - the willingness to share their expertise.
Without the assistance of international organizations such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and other important initiatives like the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership or Global Threat Reduction Initiative - such an effort would be simply undoable or unmanageable.
I do believe that consultation and cooperation with these organizations will optimize the whole process and will lower the development costs wherever possible and justified.
Also the opportunities offered by bilateral cooperation are of the primary importance to the successful completion of the entire project. It would be desirable to wisely imitate and develop the most successful strategies in this matter.
Poland attaches the utmost importance to a high level of nuclear safety worldwide. Although nuclear safety is a national responsibility, it can have implications beyond national boundaries and international cooperation on this issue is indispensable. Poland being a Contracting Party to all the international legal instruments developed under auspices of the IAEA in that field, is fully convinced of their importance and essential role for the maintenance of nuclear facilities and materials safe and secure worldwide.
This brings me to the conclusion that nuclear safety and security should remain at the top of the list of priorities.
However, in the context of the global revival of nuclear energy, the list of topics of international cooperation should be fulfilled by the education of a highly qualified staff for nuclear power sector and the issue of access to nuclear fuel, security of its supply and spent fuel and radioactive waste management.
i do believe that Poland has the potential to be not only a recipient of results of such international cooperation but also to be a donor in many fields.












 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT ii

 PAGE \* MERGEFORMAT i

Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



