REPUBLIC OF POLAND
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

750 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TEL. (212) 744-2506

Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY

AMBASSADOR RYSZARD SARKOWICZ
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

THIRD NPT PREPARATORY COMMITTEE
CLUSTER III

NEW YORK, 5TH MAY 2014

Mr. Chairman,
Since this is the first time my delegation is taking the floor I would like to express our full support and
confidence that Poland has in your work, Excellency, as the Chair of this session.
Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. At the
same time, using this opportunity, I would like to make some additional remarks on the current
implementation of the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety in Poland, in the context of recent decisions
taken by the Polish Government.
Mr. Chairman,
On January 28th, 2014, the Council of Ministers of Poland adopted resolution on the Polish Nuclear
Power Program (PNPP) prepared by the Minister of Economy. The program contains the scope of the
measures to be taken to safely use nuclear power in Poland.
The program defines, among others, the schedule for the construction of two nuclear power plants
and the preparation of the regulatory and organizational infrastructure for these investments. The
document describes the roles and responsibilities of all the institutions responsible for the
implementation of the Program, as well as, some issues related to nuclear safety and radiological
protection. The Program also includes: economic justification for the implementation of the nuclear
power in Poland and its funding and financing, as well as the ways of dealing with spent nuclear fuel
and radioactive waste.
Adoption of the PNPP means the beginning of a long process. The implementation of the nuclear
power does not only mean nuclear power plant construction and the adding of the energy from
nuclear power plants to the Polish energy mix. It is an impulse for the economic, social and regional
development. The highest requirements and standards for nuclear power will have a positive impact
on the technical culture development of the Polish power sector and industry as a whole. With the
construction of necessary scientific and industrial facilities the new industry will be developed in
which specialists with the highest qualifications will find employment.
According to the IAEA’s documents, the introduction of nuclear power requires 10 to 15 years of
preparatory work, including the construction of the first plant itself. In case of Poland, for the
implementation of nuclear power it is necessary to build almost the entire infrastructure necessary
for the development and operation of nuclear power (legal, organizational, institutional, scientific and
research, personnel training system).
Mr. Chairman,
With these remarks my delegation takes note of the report on Progress in the Implementation of the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety.
Thankyou.

