REPUBLIC OF POLAND
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

750 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017

TEL. (212) 744-2506

Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY

MR. DAMIAN PRZENIOSŁO
HEAD OF THE WMD NON-PROLIFERATION
AND DISARMAMENT POLICY DIVISION

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY
ON NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (NPT)
MAIN COMMITTEE III

NEW YORK, MAY 5TH, 2015

Mr. Chairman,
At the outset let me congratulate you on your appointment as the Chair of the Main
Committee 3. I wish to assure you of the Polish Delegation´s full support and
cooperation in fulfilment of your important mandate.
Poland fully associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union.
I would also like to draw your attention to the relevant working papers submitted by
the Non-proliferation and Disarmament Initiative.
At the same time, I would like to refer to some elements related to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, we consider particularly important from the national perspective.

Ladies and Gentlemen,
In January 2014 the Polish national Nuclear Power Programme has been adopted by
the government. It provides a roadmap for launching first ever nuclear power plant in
Poland. It defines the roles and scope of responsibilities of all stakeholders, as well as,
necessary measures to assure the highest level of safety and security. The Programme
also approaches the issues of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management. In
line with the Programme, around 12% of our electricity should be powered by nuclear
energy by 2030.
Developments with regard to the civilian nuclear capabilities touches upon also our
research reactor. Poland committed itself to continuing the program of removal of
highly-enriched uranium spent nuclear fuel with the aim of eliminating it from Polish
territory by 2016. Last year, the 7th shipment of HEU spent fuel has been successfully
implemented. The last shipment is scheduled for 2016 and thus all HEU fuel will be
eliminated from the Polish soil. The whole process continues under the auspices of the
Global Threat Reduction Initiative.

Mr. Chairman,
We undertake actions with regard to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, being fully aware
of security and safety challenges. We consider nuclear and radiation safety to be of the
utmost importance. International co-operation and sharing of experience and expertise
amongst Member States is an important means of enhancing international nuclear
safety standards.
Poland has taken concrete steps to minimize the threat of nuclear terrorism and to
strengthen the chain of nuclear security which – as we all know - is only as strong as its
weakest link. Thanks to all efforts we undertook, Poland ranked 6th in the Nuclear
Threat Initiative index.
Poland believes that there is a number of events to serve upgrading and strengthening
the awareness and measures in the sphere of nuclear security. We participate in the
Nuclear Security Summits since inception of the process in 2010. Currently, with other
participants of the NSS, we work on the outcome of the last summit to be held in 2016.
We believe that achievements of the NSS will be transformed into concrete actions
supporting existing international organisations and multilateral initiatives.
Let me also stress in this context the role and importance of technical cooperation and
programmes, mostly in the framework of the IAEA’s activities. This cooperation helps a
lot in building the responsible development of peaceful applications of nuclear
technology, including Nuclear Safety and Security, Sustainable Energy, Health,
Industrial Applications and many other field.

Mr. Chairman,
Let me refer to two initiatives we consider as an important support to the
strengthening of the third pillar of the NPT.
One of them is the Capacity Building Initiative, currently submitted by France. As a
country embarking on a nuclear power programme, we share French assessment that
the capacity building is a key element of the responsible development of nuclear
energy. At present we are in the process of analysing this project, including how to link
it with the IAEA’s efforts.

It is worth to mention as well, the Peaceful Uses Initiative. Poland will consider ways
and means to increase our involvement in this programme.

Mr. Chairman,
Taking into account a growing global demand for nuclear power, we expect this
conference to make specific recommendations with regard to nuclear safety and
security, supporting the central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Thank you.

