Statement by
The Republic of Korea
At
The First Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

9 May 2012, Vienna

Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energv (Cluster 111)

Mr. Chairman,
The Republic of Korea fully appreciates the inalienable right of all NPT parties to develop the research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. However, the exercise of these rights entails compliance
with the obligations under the Treaty as reaffirmed in the final document o f the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In
light of the sensitive nature of nuclear energy and its potentially devastating non-peaceful military applications, it is
our firm belief that the full confidence of the international community in the exclusively peacefill nature of a State's
nuclear program is vital to realizing the benefits of peaceful use and applications.
The final document o f the 2010 NPT Review Conference included a number of important principles,
priority areas and practical actions to promote international efforts to facilitate peaceful uses and applications o f
nuclear energy. Stressing due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world, the Review
Conference agreed to strengthen the IAEA's technical cooperation programme. Noting the necessity for continued
efforts to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the IAEA T C programme, the Review Conference also
agreed to put forth its utmost effort to ensure sufficient, assured and predictable resources for technical cooperation.
The Republic of Korea fully supports the IAEA technical cooperation program as one of the main vehicles
for the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to developing countries in need. In this regard, the
Republic of Korea welcomes the Peaceful Uses Initiative (PUI) of the United States that aims to expand support for
the IAEA's mission to provide developing countries with wider access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Believing that the PUI will enhance cooperation on peaceful uses pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, and being a full
beneficiary o f nuclear power, the Republic of Korea is committed to sharing its experience and capabilities in this
field with those counties in need through the IAEA, including the PUI. It is in this context that the Republic of
Korea decided to fund an IAEA project to develop an e-learning module on nuclear power plant infrastructure
through the PUI o f USD 800,000. We would like to encourage other States in a position to do so to likewise
contribute to the PUI.

The 2010 NPT Review Conference called upon State parties to ensure that the use of nuclear energy must
be accompanied by commitments to and ongoing implementation of safeguards as well as appropriate and effective
levels of safety and security. The Fukushima accident last year was a sobering reminder to the international
community of the importance of safety and security in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. The accident raised the
issue of nuclear safety to the forefront of the global agenda and catalyzed serious national and international efforts to
assess and strengthen nuclear safety. The Republic of Korea welcomes the IAEA's central role in the international
efforts to respond to and draw lessons-learned from the Fukushima accident. The Ministerial Declaration of June
201 1 and the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety adopted last September under the auspices of the IAEA have provided
the international community with a roadmap as well as comprehensive and concrete measures to strengthen nuclear
safety worldwide. As the implementation ofthe Action Plan will require the f i l l cooperation and participation of all
stakeholders, we join other delegations in urging State parties to ensure that the measures agreed in the Action Plan
are implemented quickly to the full extent.
As part of its efforts to strengthen nuclear safety in light of the accident, and pursuant to the
recommendations for follow-on actions of the 2010 NPT review conference, Korea received an IRRS (Integrated
Regulatory Review Service) peer review mission in July 201 1, performed stress test on its all nuclear facilities and,
most importantly, established an independent nuclear regulatory body. And to further strengthen national nuclear
security capacity, the Republic of Korea plans to receive an IAEA IPPAS (International Physical Protection
Advisory Service) mission in 2013.
We also would like to bring to your attention the Seoul Communique of the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit
that emphasized the need to address the issues of nuclear safety and nuclear security in a coherent manner. The
Seoul Summit marked real progress towards the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy for all mankind by
reinforcing the global nuclear security architecture with the highest-level of political commitment to nuclear security
by leaders of 53 countries and four international organizations.
The Republic of Korea believes that multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle would help achieve
NPT objectives and promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy by providing back-up access to nuclear fuel. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a LEU bank under the auspices of the IAEA in December 2010 and the
United Kingdom's Nuclear Fuel Assurance WFA) mechanism approved by the Board of Governors in March 201 1.
We support both of these multilateral efforts to assure a supply of LEU for power generation as they adequately
address proliferation concerns while not infringing on the rights of participation in the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
As crucial as the assurance o f non-proliferation and assurance of supply and services are to such endeavors,
multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle should give due consideration to the back end of the full fuel cycle
as well. Waste management is a serious and growing problem in Korea that must be addressed in a timely manner.
International collaboration is sorely needed in this area to develop ways of reusing or disposing spent fuel that meet
non-proliferation standards. Furthermore, we would do well to give additional consideration to incentives for
cooperation in multilateral arrangements in addition to formal eligibility criteria.
Given the profound implications of the outcome of the last NPT review conference, the Republic of Korea
hopes that participants will engage further in concrete actions on promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
reaffirming the basic principles of the NPT regime.
Thank you. /End/

