Statement by Romania
at the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Second Session, Geneva, 23 April – 4 May 2018
Cluster III (Peaceful uses of nuclear energy)
Mr. Chairman,
Romania aligns itself with the EU statement. In addition, allow me to highlight a
few remarks in national capacity, to reaffirm our commitment to promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, as provided in Article IV of the NPT.
Mr. Chairman,
Romania recognizes the central role of the IAEA in promoting the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy and nuclear technology, given their essential role in several
fields such as the socio-economic development, science and medicine,
innovation and technology, as well as in contributing to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
It is our strong believe that non-proliferation strictness is the only path to access
the full potential of nuclear technology for peaceful uses. This requires
achieving and maintaining the highest standards of safety and security. Striking
a balance between rights and obligations is an achievable and rewarding goal.
Mr. Chairman,
Promoting and implementing the highest safety, security and non-proliferation
standards by all NPT States Parties is crucial for ensuring the safe use of nuclear
energy. Romania, based on more than 60 year experience, has demonstrated a
strong commitment to nuclear safety by strengthening its regulatory framework
for nuclear and radiation safety and making important progress related on the
management of radioactive waste and nuclear spent fuel, as was certified by the
IAEA experts in 2017.
Gaining expertise in the field of nuclear safety and security helped Romania to
become a reliable provider of training and assistance bilaterally or through the
IAEA Technical Cooperation (TC) Programme. Romania is a consistent
counterpart designated for regional TC projects focused on capacity building
activities, strengthening and maintaining capacities in the safe, peaceful and
secure use of nuclear technology. Considering the experience gained in this
field, Romania states its readiness to share its theoretical and practical
knowledge with other IAEA Member States.

We also underscore the importance of the nuclear energy in the energy mix and
the crucial role of international cooperation for promoting a responsible and
sustainable development of nuclear energy. To this end, Romania fully endorses
the Working Paper submitted by France that advances examples of good
practices in the field of civil nuclear cooperation. Romania reaffirms its
readiness and responsibility to assume greater roles in the IAEA community in
order to ensure the efficiency and progress of the Agency through policy
making.
Mr. Chairman,
Romania welcomes the upcoming IAEA Ministerial Conference on Nuclear
Science and Technology, which will take place in Vienna this November, and the
unique opportunity provided for holding high-level dialogue on nuclear science,
technology and applications for peaceful uses, on both ministerial and technical
experts segments. Another opportunity for Member States to share their
experiences, lessons learned and good practices related to the security of
radioactive material will be the international conference convened by IAEA in
December 2018 on the security of radioactive material and the way forward for
prevention and detection.
In 2017, Romania joined the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and we are happy
to announce the organization of the first Ministerial Regional Conference on
Nuclear Energy, Technology and Radioactive Waste Management, set to take
place in Bucharest on 14-15 June 2018.
Mr. Chairman,
To conclude, I would like to renew Romania’s commitment to work closely with
all States Parties to NPT, IAEA and other international organizations to promote
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

