PERMANENT MISSION OF ROMANIA

MISSION PERMANENTE DE LA ROUMANIE
aupr~ des Nations Unies

to the United Nations

Statement
by H.E. Ambassador Cristian ISTRATE,
Pennanent Representative of Romania in Vienna,
at the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee
for the 2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
Cluster Ill
New York- 5 May 2014

573-Sn Third Avenue, New Yor1<, NY 10016, Phone: (212)-682-3273. (212)-682-3274. Fax: (212)路682-9746
Homepage. http://mpnewyork.mao.ro. Email: misiune@romaniaun.org

Thank you, Mr. Cbairmnn,
Since this is me r.rst time my delegation is laking the flood during this session of me PrepCom.l would
like to thank you for the excellent work done so far.
Romania fully associat.:s itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would
therefore limit myself to a few brief points of national relevance.
Romania reatllrms its support for the inalienable riaht of all States Parties to the Treaty to develop
research, production and usc of nuclear energy ror peaceful purposes, in accordance with Articles I. U
and Ill of the Treaty. At the ~me time, it is important to keep underlining that the use of nuclear
materials and technologies must remain exclusively for peaceful purposes, based on thll IAEA
integrated safeguards system and fully respecting the lA F.A highest standArds of safety, sccurily and
non-proliferation. f'or this reason, the IAEA plays a crucial role in ensuring a saft~, so:cure ami
proliferation-free use of nuclear llnergy.
Developments over the past scv.,ral years l1avc underscored, once again, the critical role of the
Additional Protoeol and the comprehensive safeguards agreements, which must become universal and
establish a solid verification standard, strengthening the \AEA's capacity to derect and respond to noncomplianco:. In this respect, we would welcome further development of the State Level Concept as a
valuable tool for the implementation of the Treaty, which would help create an environment thar
encourages peaco:fulnuclear cooperation.
Romania is a strong supporter of the IAEA's Technical Cooperation (TC) Programme and of the
statutory right of any Member State to be eligible ibr TC progmmmes. TC is the way in which the
Agency promotes tho: application of nucleDT路related tcclmiques to eradicate poverty and hunger
worldwide, but also the way in which it helps Member States with civilian nuclear power prognmunes
in consolidating capacity-building throughout the entire nuclear fitc,J cycle, while maintaining the 1AEA
standards of safety and security. Jn this regard I'd like to mention that. in S~ptember 20 13, Romania
and the 1AEA signed the Country Programme Framework for 2014-2019, which includes 5 main areas
of activities: strengthening management in the field of radioactive waste; management system
optimization of the Romanian regulatory body; workforce deve lopment In the nuclear field; population
health, as well as food and agriculture.
We want to underline the need for growing transparency and trust between countries using peaceful
nuclear energy in order to meet the highest nuclear security, safery and non-proliferation requirements,
in full compliance with all relevant International agreements, and encourage the IAEA Member States
to host peer reviews and follow-up missions in the field of nuclear safety ond ~eourity. In this regard,
we welcome and support all the initiatives undertaken so far in Ibis respect - the Peaceli.1l Uses
Initiative, the Proliferation Security Initiative. tho: Olobal lnitiativc to Comhat Nuclenr Terrorism
(GCINT) and tho Nuclear Security Summit (NSS) process. We also urge all States that have not yet
done so, to become party, as soon ns possible, to all international legal instruments related to nuclear
safety, security and nonproliferation.
Mr. C/rairmau,
In 2012, at the Nuclear So:curity Summit (NSS) In Seoul, Romania announced a number of unilateral
commitments.. I am pleased to confirm that Romania fulfilled all these commitments: we hosted an
IAEA International Physical Protection Advi~ory Service Mission; we offered a voluntary contribution
to tho Nuclear Security Fund of the International Atomic Energy Agency; we provided assistance and

expertise, based on the national expcrienc.e in the field of conversion from highly enriched uranium to
low enriched uranium.
Building on what we have achiev~::d so far in the Implementation of the NSS commitment~. we
identified funhcr commitments during the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit in the Hague: we will make
an additional financial contribution to the Nuclear Security Fund of the international Atomic Energy
Agency; wt: will receive, In May 2014, an IAF.A InternationaL Nuclear Security Advisory Service
mis.~ion; we arc going to extend an invitation for an lAEA International Physica l Protection Advisory
Service follow-up mission, in 2016.
t.fr. Clluirman,

Despite all tremendous challenges, the NPT remains tho: key element of the global non-proliferation
regime and an essential inslrument of our collective security. The three interconnected pillars of the
路rreaty offer the adequAte framework for preserving and strengthening intemational peace and security,
while, at the same time, allowing benefits to all from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Romania
continues to fulfill ull Its NPT obligations and remains committed to the full implementation of the
2010 RevCon Action l'lan.
We reaffirm our full support and cooperation in the framework of IAEI\ 路s continuous efforts to
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a safe and secure manner. In this respect we strongly
hclicvc that tbis PrepCom will bring its valuable contribution to advance the implementation of the
NI'T and to contribute to the strengthening of the current global nuclear architecture.
To conclude, I would like to assure you, Mr. Chairman, of Romania's commitment to support you in
your endeavour to make this PrepCom an effective step towards a successful 2015 R~::vCun.

I tltank you, Mr 01aimum.

2

