Unofficial translation

.~-'.-

Pennanent Mission
of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations
in New YOlk

TIocromrnoe
rrpe):lCTaB!ITeJIbCIBO

POCCrnl:cKOH <l>e):lepaI(IDi
IIpIi OpraIDl3llll,lili

Ofu,e):\IiHeHHbIX Ha:r:(Illi
B HhIo-HopKe

STATEMENT
by Mikhail I.UIiyanov
Acting Head of the Delegation ofthe Russian Federation
to the 2015 Review Conference ofthe Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(Cluster 3: peaceful use of nuclear energy)

New York, May 4, 2015

•
Mr. Chairman,
Russia consistently advocates broader access to the benefits of peaceful
nuclear energy for the States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and promotes international cooperation in this sphere in
compliance with Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. We believe that
there is no alternative to nuclear energy in the world. Today, this is well
developed technology capable of addressing many modem challenges.
The world community is overcoming the psychological shock caused by
the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi in 2011 which prejudiced the attitude to
nuclear energy. Recent IAEA data indicate a constantly increasing demand in
nuclear energy. By the end of2014, there were 438 power units operating in the
world, with a total net installed capacity of 375.9 GWe. 70 more power units
were under construction. This confinns that nuclear energy remains attractive
for many countries and continues to play an important role in achieving global
energy security and sustainable development.
Nuclear energy development is a prlority for the Russian Federation.
Since 1954 when the world's first nuclear power plant was put into operation in
Obninsk, our country has accumulated great experience in nuclear energy
development. Today, Russian nuclear industry comprises 350 plants and
organizations with over 255,000 employees. This industry ensures a complete
production cycle in the sphere of nuclear energy: from uranium mining to NPPs
construction and electric power production, as well as a wide range of research
and development activities.
At present, 33 power units are

ill

operation

ill

Russia; their total net

installed capacity is 25.2 GWe. Nine power units of 10 GWe capacity and one
floating nuclear thermal power plant· "Akademik Lomonosov" of 80 MWe
capacity are under construction. There are operating plants that provide with
nuclear fuel not only Russian nuclear power plants, but NPPs in many countries
of the world as well. The Russian Government has set the goal to increase the

• !-

3

share of nuclear power in its energy mix from 16 .up to 25 per cent by 2030;" .
which means opening 28 new nuclear power units by then.
In the long run, our country associates nuclear power development with
the 4th generation fast-neutron reactors of closed nuclear fuel cycle (NFC).
Russia is the only country in the world where a 600 MW fast-neutron reactor
(BN-600) has been operating successfully for many years. We have also
completed the construction of the 800 MW reactor (BN-800). We are currently
carrying out its physical initiation. An experimental fast-neutron reactor based
on the Russian technology is operating in China.
The Research Institute of Atomic Reactors

ill

Dimitrovgrad is

implementing a project on the construction of a new mUltipurpose research fast
reactor (MBIR) intended to replace its only functional research fast reactor with
sodium coolant BOR-60. We are plarming to create an international research
centre on the basis of the MBIR.

Mr. Chairman,
For many years, Russia has been providing assistance to States Parties to
the NPT in developing nuclear technology, as well as constructing and
operating NPPs. The first unit of the Belarusian NPP and the third unit of the
Tianwan NPP in China are currently under construction, a contract was signed
for the construction of the Hanhikivi-I NPP in Finland. The documentation on
the construction of the Akkuyu NPP has been elaborated and submitted to
government authorities of the Republic of Turkey. In March 2014,
intergovernmental agreements on cooperation on the project to expand and
modernize the Paks NPP were signed with Hungary. The first NPP in Jordan
will be constructed on the basis of Russian technology.
Russia attaches great importance to promoting cooperation with the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States in the sphere of peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Since 2010, all the elements of the International Uranium
Enrichment Center (IUEC) in Angarsk have been implemented in cooperation

4

with Kazakhstan. Its creation is part of the 2006 Initiative of Russian President
. Vladimir Putin to develop global. nuclear energy infrastructure and create
international centers providing the services of nuclear fuel cycle, which is aimed
at controlling the spread of sensitive NFC technologies, without hindering
world nuclear energy development. This initiative is the Russian contribution to
the solution of the important task of ensuring reliable access to the benefits of
nuclear energy for all the interested countries, with due observation of the
requirements of the non-proliferation regime.
On the basis of the Russian initiative and the agreement with the IAEA,
the reserve of low-enriched uranium (LEU) was established to ensure a
guaranteed supply. Its volume is 120 tons of LEU with up to 5 per cent
enrichment. At the end of2010, all the necessary nuclear material to create such
a reserve was deposited at storage facility in Angarsk and placed under the
IAEA safeguards. Russia bears all the costs associated with the storage,
maintenance, nuclear safety and security, as well as the application of the LEUrelated safeguards.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for the IAEA project to establish its
own 'LEU bank, initiated, among others, with the participation of the Russian
Federation. We welcome the consent of the Republic of Kazakhstan to provide
a site for the LEU bank.

Mr. Chairman,
The issues of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste are known
obstacles to the widespread use of nuclear energy. This is not only a complex
technological issue, but also a key aspect to consider in case of opting for
nuclear energy. For many years, leading experts, including those from the
IAEA, have noted that the solution to this problem is possible through the
establishment of interstate, regional and global cooperation at the final stage of
the nuclear fuel cycle (NFC). The decision may also be based on an NPP
supplier country providing a comprehensive service package which includes not

5

only the'construction ofa station, but also the supply of nuclear fuel for itias
well as the removal of spent nuclear fuel for further handling. Russia uses this
approach in cooperation with some countries.
We continue the practice of the return of spent fuel from research reactors
of Russian design. The return of highly enriched uranium (HEU) fuel for
research reactors from third countries is carried out in cooperation with the
United States and with the participation of the IAEA. In total, since the launch
of the programme, 800 kg of fresh fuel and 1346 kg of exposed HEU fuel were
exported from 14 countries. Russia also supports the IAEA programme aimed at
reducing enrichment of nuclear fuel for research reactors to a level below 20%.
Its implementation will allow reduce significantly the level of risk associated
with HEU proliferation.

Mr. Chairman,
The use of nuclear energy reqUIres attention to nuclear safety. The
Russian Federation is constantly working on strengthening nuclear safety at the
nuclear power plants. Their stable operation proves the success of these efforts.
Modem Russian nuclear reactors that are under construction meet the highest
international requirements in the field of nuclear safety.
Russia participates in the main international legal mechanisms in the area
of nuclear safety - the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Convention on Early
Notification of a Nuclear Accident, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, and the
Convention on Assistance in Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological
Emergency. Since 2005, Russia is a Party to the 1963 Vienna Convention on
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage.
Russian specialists actively participate

ill

fulfillment of the Agency's

Action Plan on Nuclear Safety. We are implementing a series of additional
projects between the Russian Federation and the IAEA to support this Plan, as
well as a number of other international initiatives on a voluntary basis aimed at

6

verification'and ultimate confirmation· of the __ safety of Russian· nuclear '.'
technologies.
In 2014, Russia participated in a series of meetings of the Contracting
Parties to international legal documents that regulate the way the nuclear safety
of various types of nuclear facilities and activities is ensured. We particularly
note the Sixth Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on
Nuclear Safety, in the course of which the mechanisms of implementation of the
Convention were significantly updated
Mr. Chairman,

Nuclear safety of atomic energy should be improved using new technical
solutions. They will ensure an optimal combination for future energy
components and clear and safe prospects. In this context, priority is given to
establishing sustainable nuclear power systems.
Russia is an initiator and a major sponsor of the IAEA International
Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO) aimed at
creating economically competitive, environmentally safe nuclear power systems
that would reduce the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons and ensure the
sustainable development of civilization. This intellectual forum improves
Member States understanding of technological innovations and institutional
characteristics contributing to transition to sustainable nuclear power systems.
The number of countries taking part in INPRO has reached 40. We note with
satisfaction the decision of the IAEA Director General Yukiya Arnano to tum
the INPRO project into a fully operating section within the Department of
Nuclear Energy starting from January 2014.
Mr. Chairman,

As a reliable partner, Russia has always fulfilled its obligations under
multilateral and bilateral agreements and projects concerning peaceful use of
nuclear energy and will continue to do so regardless of any political events. The
intergovernmental agreements on cooperation in the field of the peaceful use of

7

nUClear energy and a number of agreements on specific areas of cooperation
establish the necessary legal framework for this.
Russia is determined to cooperate closely with States Parties to the NPT
in establishing a genuinely modem system of cooperation in the field of the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. We are convinced that this system should ensure
a safe development of global nuclear energy without the risk of nuclear
proliferation, and be based on the lAEA safeguards and multilateral approaches
to the nuclear fuel cycle.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

,",

