Mr, Chairman,
Russia has decided to further develop its nuclear energy sector. It is not merely a political decision prompted by objective circumstances, but a specific programme of action with the necessary legal, financial and organizational framework.
Mr. Chairman,
Russia has consistently advocated increasing the number of countries enjoying benefits of nuclear energy, promoting and expanding the range of nuclear technology applications, with non-proliferation obligations being complied with.
For many years, we have been providing assistance to NPT States Parties in mastering nuclear technologies in the energy sector, constructing and operating nuclear power plants, supplying nuclear fuel, nuclear equipment and materials, ensuring nuclear safety, managing radioactive waste and training nuclear specialists.
In the recent five years, Russia has concluded or amended its agreements on cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy with six countries. These are Australia, Great Britain, Egypt, Indonesia, Peru and Chile. We are building nuclear reactors in China, India and Iran. Besides, a contract has been concluded on the construction of Belene Nuclear Power Plant in Bulgaria.
Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right of all Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance with Article IV of the Treaty implies possible development of national nuclear fuel cycles, some elements of which are highly sensitive in terms of non-proliferation. Thus, safe conditions should be provided for carrying out national nuclear programmes, finding solutions to non-proliferation concerns in this context.
We believe that these two goals could be achieved through multilateral aDnroach.es towards :he nuclear lire! cvcie. offering economically sound and feasible alternatives lo development at -ill nuclear "ue! jycle elements at 'he nationai 'e^ei. >i won id appropriate .o .emind '^ere lie veiginy minion af I AH A director >-eneril Monamua aiBarauei av,ng -bar 'here ire au -eusons oday o auilu lew -acuities a> rnrv"! jraraum a"	rraiiiateu auc'ear "'ue'.
In recent years, many initiatives have been put forward in this field — both national and multilateral. Russian President Vladimir Putin suggested that we work together to develop global nuclear energy infrastructure and to set up international centers providing nuclear fuel cycle services. Russia's first practical contribution to the implementation of this approach has been the establishment of the International Uranium Enrichment Center (IUEC) in the town of Angarsk. The Center is intended to provide States with guaranteed access to uranium enrichment capacities in order to meet their needs in nuclear fuel without building their own NFC. At the same time the Russian initiative does not require prospective participants to renounce establishing their own nuclear fuel cycle elements. What is important is that countries in question comply with their non-proliferation obligations. Russia and Kazakhstan have already become participants in the Center, with Armenia completing its accession procedures.
Furthermore, Russia has proposed to set up a low-enriched uranium reserve within the IUEC, managed by the IAEA in order to ensure guaranteed supplies. The IUEC stockpile is expected to hold a certain amount of low-enriched uranium which can be supplied at an IAEA decision and at market prices to countries experiencing difficulties in obtaining nuclear fuel from the market. Any country honouring its non-proliferation obligations will be able to resort to this guaranteed supply. Presently, an agreement is being elaborated between the Government of Russia and the IAEA to establish the guaranteed stockpile within the IUEC.
We provided detailed information on the IUEC and the guaranteed low-enriched uranium stockpile at the briefing we held on May 5.
Mr. Chairman,
There is another noteworthy aspect of ensuring access of all States to peaceful uses of nuclear energy — development of proliferation-resisiani nueiear energy sWeiUS.

of high and economically competitive technologies in the innovative process, which provide higher safety, pose a minimum risk in terms of proliferation and negative environmental effects. Nowadays, the project involves 28 States possessing developed nuclear technologies or small-scale nuclear programmes. Russia allocates most of the funds to finance the INPRO project, as well as contributes expertise.
We also support other initiatives aimed at large-scale development of nuclear energy on the basis of international cooperation. The Generation IV International Forum is another major international project. Russia is completing procedures necessary to join it.
As far as innovative nuclear energy systems are concerned, the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project under the IAEA auspices deserves special attention. In the course of its implementation scientific and technological groundwork is to be laid for thermonuclear energy, a safe, exceptionally clean and virtually inexhaustible fuel resource. Having ratified the ITER Agreement in 2007, Russia has embarked on working at the project and has fully met its funding obligations.
Mr. Chairman,
Nowadays developing countries show a growing interest in nuclear energy. At the same time, nuclear technology and reactors designed for large developed countries sometimes fail to answer purposes of developing countries due to insufficient power grid levels and limited energy demand. Sustainable energy supplies in these countries can be ensured to a great extent with the help of medium-and small-capacity reactors. Mass production of exportable small- and medium-capacity reactors, including mobile ones, could contribute to reducing capital costs and rendering the least expensive nuclear energy services to developing countries. Russia develops low- and medium-capacity reactors — both offshore and utationarv.
Mr. i.'hairmun.
The >v:nand!nc inciear merizy aenenuence m uiciear energy ">r;nu iuc:ear "ue! *-.jser'-a.. ruin u o
-generation .opacities and :he •vv:r!d*< ' nerving it? out concerns er vhe!her e aave •un:c:e,.u •irou>* jsiimates:. lie jurr^nti''	4e:--er es
of natural uranium will last for another 70-100 years, while the service life of the nuclear reactors that are currently under construction will be 50-60 years. It is possible to increase our nuclear fuel reserves by developing fast breeder reactors. Besides, they would enable us to significantly reduce the amounts of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) and growing surplus of plutonium from SNF. For years now, Russia has been successfully operating one such breeder reactor— BN-600, while another reactor— BN-800 — should come into operation in 2012. It is to bum both plutonium from SNF from civil reactors and that recognized as surplus for military purposes in the course of disarmament programmes.
Mr. Chairman,
We attach particular importance to solving the problems related to spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management. Russia ratified the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management and, in 2007, presented the first national report on its implementation. In April 2007, it adopted the Federal Target Programme on Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation Safety for 2008 and up to 2015. In the near future we are going to submit for ratification by the State Duma a draft law on radioactive waste management, which would lay out Russia's exceptional powers as radioactive waste owner and provide for institution, in 2009, of a national radioactive waste management operator. The work on draft laws on spent nuclear fuel and nuclear energy facilities decommissioning is currently underway.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT Treaty is a key element, a guarantee in its own right for the ever increasing international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Russia stands ready to further cooperate with the States Parties to the Treaty. Our vision of such cooperation implies achieving development goals and expanding the geographical scope of peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Thank you.