Mr, Chairman,
A growing interest in peaceful nuclear energy is an objective trend in the development of today's world. As the IAEA Director General said at the Beijing International Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Energy in the 21st Century, more than 60 countries — mostly in the developing world — are interested in launching nuclear power programmes.
In his concluding statement, the President of this Conference noted that while respecting the right of each State to define its national energy policy, vast majority of participants affirmed that nuclear energy, as a proven, safe, competitive technology, will make an increasing contribution to the sustainable development of humankind throughout the 21st century and beyond.
Thanks to rapid and quality development of nuclear technology, as well as efficient measures in the field of nuclear safety and control, there have been no serious incidents at nuclear power plants since the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl accidents. What is more, the nuclear power plants functioning around the world meet high nuclear safety standards. This, together with low greenhouse gas emissions, makes nuclear energy attractive to a wide range of states. According to different estimates and forecasts, by 2030 there will be a 1,5 times to 3 times increase in the installed capacity of nuclear power plants in the world as compared to 372.2 GWe in 2007. Adjustments will be made to these forecasts due to the current economic crisis, yet even today one can be certain that the trend of the increase in the use of nuclear energy will remain.
Mr. Chairman,
Russia is one of the countries who have made political decision to further develop their nuclear energy sector. Today, 31 nuclear power generating units of 10 nuclear power plants are operated in Russia with aggregate installed capacity of 23.2 GW. Specific action programme has been elaborated, and the necessary legal, financial and organizational framework has been developed. It is expected that the share of nuclear power generation in the European part of Russia will exceed 30 percent. Since 2020, a staged transition to new technological platform based on fast reactors and closed nuclear fuel cycles is to commence.
While developing nuclear energy, we attach special importance to addressing issues of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management. Russia has ratified the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management. In 2007, it adopted the Federal Target Programme on Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation Safety for 2008 and up to 2015, In the near future we are going to submit for ratification by the State Duma a draft law on radioactive waste management, which would lay out Russia's exceptional powers as radioactive waste owner and provide for institution, in
2009, of a national radioactive waste management operator. The work on draft laws on spent nuclear fuel and nuclear energy facilities decommissioning is currently underway.
We have consistently supported more and more states striving to benefit from peaceful nuclear programmes. For many years, the Russian Federation has actively cooperated with states parties to the NPT in constructing and operating nuclear power plants, supplying nuclear fuel, nuclear equipment and materials, ensuring nuclear safety, managing radioactive waste and training nuclear specialists.
By now, the Russian Federation has concluded intergovernmental agreements on cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy with 35 countries, as well as a number of agreements in specific areas of cooperation. Major bilateral projects are underway. Two light water reactors have been put in operation in China; two units are under construction in India, with an agreement concluded for the construction of four more units in this country, the construction of a nuclear power plant continues in Iran, and the construction of two units has begun in Bulgaria (Belene).
Mr. Chairman,
The inalienable right of all parties to the Treaty to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, implies possible development of national nuclear fuel cycles, as well as the construction of nuclear power plants. Although the operation of nuclear power plants, and therefore the realization of right to peaceful uses of nuclear energy pose no direct risk in terms of proliferation of nuclear weapons, the facilities for uranium enrichment and reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel which form part of nuclear fuel cycle, do pose such risk.
For this reason, Article IV of the NPT should be implemented while observing the right of other states parties to the Treaty to be certain that such peaceful uses of nuclear energy will not lead to proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Only unconditional fulfillment of obligations under Articles II and III of the NPT, the efficient application of the IAEA safeguards and Additional Protocols can be a guarantee. This also opens new opportunities for multilateral cooperation, the benefits of which become more evident as states, group of states and organizations make proposals on cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We believe that the most efficient way to resolve this tangle of problems is the implementation of multilateral approaches towards the nuclear fuel cycle, offering economically sound and feasible alternatives to development of all nuclear fuel cycle elements at the national level, with central role of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
In recent years, many initiatives have been put forward in this field — both national and multilateral. Russia has made its contribution to developing multilateral approaches, it was the initiative proposed by the President of the Russian Federation in 2006 to establish global nuclear energy infrastructure and to set up multinational centers
to provide nuclear fuel cycle services. Russia's first practical step was to establish the International Uranium Enrichment Center (IUEC) in Angarsk. The Russian initiative does not require prospective participants to renounce establishing their own nuclear fuel cycle elements. What is important is that the countries comply with their non-proliferation obligations.
The Intergovernmental Russian-Kazakh Agreement has served as its legal framwork, and the Center has been established in accordance with Russian legislation as an open joint-stock company, which allows for its operation based on the market principles. Russian and Kazakh commercial companies participate in the Center, with Armenia and Ukraine finalizing procedures for accession to the agreement. A number of countries expressed their interest in the Center's activities. The Center is open for accession by the companies from other countries without any political conditions. We invite other states to consider acceding to the Russian initiative.
In response to the initiative by the IAEA Director General, Russian Government proposed to set up at its own expense a reserve of low-enriched uranium (LEU) managed by the IAEA in order to additionally guarantee nuclear fuel supplies in case market mechanisms fail or such supplies are stopped for political reasons. The IUEC is to be responsible for storing this reserve, In case of necessity any IAEA member state complying with its non-proliferation obligations may request the IAEA to allot LEU from this reserve. Two agreements form a legal framework for the implementation of this proposal; those are the agreement between the Government of Russia and the IAEA and the agreement between the recipient countries and the IAEA. To give you an opportunity to study the Russian proposal in greater detail, we are distributing here as a working paper the paper we presented at the March session of the IAEA Board of Governors, titled "Development of the Russian Federation Initiative to Establish a Reserve of Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) for the Supply of LEU to the IAEA for its Member States".
We note other countries' efforts in the field of multilateral approaches to nuclear fuel cycles. We reaffirm Russia's readiness to cooperate with states which participate in other initiatives in this sphere. We are also circulating a joint Russian-German working paper on the principles of ensuring guaranteed nuclear fuel supplies and activities in the field of multilateral approaches to nuclear fuel cycles. We invite other countries to become co-sponsors of these documents.
Mr. Chairman,
To sum up, nuclear energy can resolve the problems of supporting the world without increasing environmental pressure. For this purpose, nuclear energy should be based on technologies which would allow for the development of nuclear fuel cycle free from deficiencies of the existing nuclear energy.
Such approach can be ensured only through transition to a new technological platform based on a multicomponent nuclear energy, including nuclear power plants with fast breeder reactors and innovative closed nuclear fuel cycle technologies.
There is another important aspect of ensuring every state's access to peaceful uses of nuclear energy — the development of safe and proliferation-resistant nuclear energy systems.
International cooperation aimed at addressing these issues is a key element of the IAEA's International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO), which was launched by the Agency at Russia's initiative in 2000. The INPRO project is aimed at developing global scenarios and regional trends of nuclear energy development in the 21st century, making use of innovative and economically competitive technologies, which provide higher safety, pose a minimum risk in terms of proliferation and negative environmental effects. We note fruitful cooperation among states which participate in this mechanism. The experience and results of cooperation within INPRO can also be used within the framework of multilateral initiatives. At the moment, the project involves European Commission and 29 states possessing developed nuclear technologies or small-scale nuclear programmes. Russia has ensured the funding of the project up to 2012, which allows for the long-term planning of the project.
We also support other initiatives aimed at large-scale development of nuclear energy on the basis of international cooperation. The Generation IV International Forum is another platform for international cooperation. Russia is completing procedures necessary to accede to its Framework Agreement.
As a part of the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme, Russia continues to assist states in personnel training. We will be glad to further to receive foreign students and specialists to share experience, train and re-train personnel for national nuclear energy programmes of the Agency's member states.
In 2008, the Government of the Russian Federation decided to allocate 240 million rubles to the IAEA's extra-budgetary fund to provide target financial support to four projects within IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme for 2009-2011 with the view to improving the safety of the Armenia nuclear power plant.
Russia is also to make a contribution of $10 million to the Nuclear Safety Account in 2009, and a contribution of $7 million to the Chernobyl Shelter Fund in 2010.
As far as innovative nuclear energy systems are concerned, the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) project under the IAEA auspices deserves special attention. In the course of its implementation scientific and technological groundwork is to be laid for thermonuclear energy, a safe, exceptionally clean and virtually inexhaustible fuel resource. Having ratified the ITER Agreement in 2007, Russia has embarked on working at the project and has fully met its funding obligations.
Mr. Chairman,
The NPT is a pivotal element of global security, ensuring steady balance between the development of nuclear energy and the international regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. To us, ensuring its further efficient and stable functioning and improving its efficiency is an indisputable priority.
Thank you for your attention.