
The Republic of Korea places the utmost value on the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as the fundamental pillar of the Treaty, as it imports more than 90 percent of its energy resources from abroad and depends on nuclear energy for more than 40 percent of its power supply. Nuclear energy is poised to play a crucial role in supporting sustainable development and in addressing the growing need for energy in today's world, as is the case with the Republic of Korea, which is the world's sixth largest nuclear energy user with 20 nuclear power plants in operation.
Fully aware of the tremendous potential of nuclear energy, we nevertheless believe that the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy under Article IV of the Treaty is contingent upon compliance with the non-proliferation and safeguards obligations contained in Articles I, II and III. Recognizing that the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy must be promoted in a manner that duly takes into account various aspects of nuclear non-proliferation, safety and security, my delegation would like to highlight the following four issues that we consider relevant to the future promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
First, my delegation supports current efforts to develop a new mechanism to provide reliable and equitable access to nuclear technologies while limiting proliferation risk. In order to be successful, any fuel-supply assurance mechanism should be based on objective and fair criteria and should not be pursued in a way that denies or limits legitimate national fuel cycle choices. Furthermore, the assurance mechanism should be guaranteed to any state which demonstrates a legitimate need of fuels and is in full compliance with its non-proliferation obligations. As a major user of nuclear energy, the Republic of Korea will continue to participate in, and make positive contributions to, the relevant discussions on this issue.
Second, my delegation believes that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be promoted while ensuring a high standard of nuclear safety and security. We welcome the important progress that has been made in this area through the establishment of global norms and standards governing nuclear safety and security. The Republic of Korea will continue to support international efforts to build and strengthen a global safety and security regime and further enhance its cooperation with the IAEA and other countries.
Third, we share the view that the development of new reactors and nuclear fuel cycles is crucial in order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy while reducing the risk of nuclear proliferation. The Republic of Korea has been actively participating in the International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO) and the Generation VI International Forum (GIF). The Republic of Korea remains committed to the innovation of nuclear facilities and fuel cycles in collaboration with other states. In addition, as a new member of the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership (GNEP), we welcome and support the GNEP principles. GNEP is a timely and important initiative to promote the safe and secure expansion of nuclear energy by accelerating the development of advanced fuel cycle technologies that are both friendly to the environment and resistant to the proliferation.
Lastly, my delegation attaches great importance to the IAEA's role in promoting and expanding technical cooperation to enhance the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. We commend the IAEA Secretariat for its efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's technical cooperation program. The Republic of Korea will continue lending its strong support to these essential activities.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.