SOUTH AFRICA: NATIONAL STATEMENT FOR MAIN COMMITTEE III
PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY
Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and would like to share some additional views in its national capacity.
Chairperson,
The demand for nuclear power and the application of nuclear technology will continue to
increase. Nuclear power and the peaceful applications of nuclear technology, if optimised to
the fullest, can meaningfully contribute to the achievement of international development goals.
The inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology is of particular relevance and
importance in attaining sustainable and accelerated economic growth in Africa.
Along with the legal commitment to the elimination of nuclear weapons and measures to
prevent proliferation, the NPT reaffirms the inalienable right to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy pursuant to Article IV of the Treaty. Peaceful nuclear co-operation and access to the
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, pursuant to Article IV of the NPT, constitute
one of the core objectives of the Treaty. In giving effect to Articles IV (1) and IV (2), South
Africa therefore cautions against any decision that would amount to a reinterpretation of, or
restriction on, this inalienable right.
My delegation therefore recommends that the Conference reaffirm the 2010 NPT Revcon
outcome which inter alia states that each country’s choices and decisions in the field of
peaceful uses should be respected and under which Member States undertook to:
•
Facilitate and reaffirm the right of States Parties to participate in the fullest
possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information
for peaceful uses of nuclear energy;
•
Give preferential treatment to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Treaty, taking the needs of developing countries, in particular, into account;
•
Facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology and international cooperation in
conformity with Articles I, II, III and IV of the Treaty, and
•

Eliminate undue restrictions inconsistent with the Treaty.

Chairperson,
The IAEA has a leading role in the development and promotion of nuclear and nuclear derived
technology that improves food security, human and animal health, environmental management
and contributes to socio-economic development. Through the work of the Agency the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy has benefited all Member States, especially developing countries. The
Agency’s nuclear application Laboratories are unique to the UN system and as a result the IAEA
is able to develop and transfer needed and often lifesaving technologies and skills to Member
States to, among others, combat and eradicate animal diseases and pests that cause diseases,
contribute to cancer management and the management of water resources.
Of particular value to the African continent has been the vaccines developed by the IAEA/FAO
Joint Division at the Agency’s Nuclear Application laboratories at Seibersdorf, as well as the
nuclear techniques developed for the early and rapid diagnosis of animal and zoonotic diseases.
These techniques and the support, which was provide to countries by the Agency to apply
them, were instrumental in the eradication of Rinderpest, a transboundary animal disease
which killed thousands of cattle, affecting the livelihoodof farmers and the economies of
countries, especially in Africa. These techniques enabled the Agency to complement
international efforts to address the outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in West Africa in 2014
and the IAEA Board of Governors approved a project during its last Board for the the
strengthening ofAfrica’s regional capacity for the diagnosis of emerging and remerging zoonotic
diseases, including Ebola, and establishing early warning systems. The Sterile Insect Technique
(SIT), developed by the Joint Division to suppress pests such as the Tsetse fly and the fruit fly, is
another example of the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.
South Africa accordingly attaches great value to the role of the Agency’s Nuclear Applications
laboratories at Seibersdorf, continues to assist Member States in enhancing their access to the
peaceful uses of nuclear technologies. We welcome the decision by the IAEA Member States to
renovate these laboratories but note with concern that if financial contributions are not
forthcoming by 1 June 2015 the Agency cannot begin with construction of the laboratories as
planned. South Africa therefore urges States Parties to contribute to the renovation of these
Laboratories to enable the IAEA to continue to meet the needs of Member States.
Chairperson,
South Africa attaches great importance to the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme which
is the vehicle through which peaceful uses of nuclear technology is made available to countries
and as such contributes towards addressing the socio-economic needs and sustainable
development challenges of developing countries. Indeed the Agency’s TC projects are more

than just political commitments, they constitute important building blocks to assist developing
countries in their efforts to alleviate poverty and achieve international development goals.
South Africa remains concerned about the lack of sufficient, assured and predictable (SAP)
funding for the Agency to fulfil its promotional mandate and to meet the increasing number of
requests for TC projects by Member States. We call on all Member States of the IAEA to pay
their contributions to the TC Fund in full and on time. South Africa is also of the opinion that
greater efforts should be made to balance the allocation of resources between the Major
Programmes of the IAEA to enable the full implementation of Article IV of the NPT. In this
regard my delegation looks forward to an agreement on the Programme and Budget for the
IAEA and the Technical Coopearation Fund Targets for the Biennium 2016-2017 that will reflect
the commitment of States Parties to the peaceful uses of nuclear technology and the full
implementation of Article IV.
Extra-budgetary support to the TC Programme has proved to be an important source of funding
over the last 5 years. South Africa has made extra-budgetary contributions through its African
Renaissance Fund to Improve Veterinary Laboratory Capacities in Sub-Saharan Africa for the
Early and Rapid Diagnoses and Control of Various Transboundary Animal Diseases. This project
has also benefited from the Peaceful Uses Initiative and will significantly contribute to food
security and poverty reduction on the African continent.
Chairperson,
Increasing the diversity of South Africa’s electricity production energy mix is a priority. South
Africa is working towards having an energy sector by 2030 that promotes economic growth and
development through energy infrastructure investment, advances social equity through
expanded access to affordable energy services and underpins environmental sustainability by
reducing pollution and mitigating the effects of climate change. Nuclear energy constitutes an
important element in the energy mix required to generate power needed for our development.
South Africa acknowledges the increasing role that the IAEA will play in future, especially in
countries that already have operating nuclear power plants. In preparation for our nuclear
build, South Africa hosted an IAEA Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review (INIR) Mission
during 2013. South Africa is the first country with an existing Nuclear Power Plant to request
such a mission, which has been recognised as a best practice by the IAEA.
South Africa supports all the IAEA’s activities that strengthen global nuclear safety and believes
that the purpose of enhancing nuclear safety should be to positively contribute to the
development and utilization of nuclear technology for peaceful uses. South Africa also
appreciates the work of the Agency in supporting the activities of the Member States to
enhance nuclear security.

In conclusion Chairperson,
South Africa believes that the integrity of the NPT rests on a fundamental bargain across the
three pillars of the Treaty, each of which must be recognized and upheld. The peaceful use of
nuclear energy is an inalienable integral right that should not be compromised. In this regard,
the Treaty must be implemented in all its aspects without favour or prejudice and no aspect
should be more strictly enforced or require stricter implementation than any other.
Thank you.

