
Mr. Chairman.
I would like to extend my congratulations on your assumption of the chairmanship of this important Committee. I am confident that this Committee will bear fruitful results under your leadership. At the same time, I would like to assure you of my delegation's full support and cooperation as you take on the challenging tasks of this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate my Government's strong commitment to the NPT as the basis for international efforts to promote nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament as well as peaceful uses of nuclear energy. My delegation recognizes the crucial role of the IAEA in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under the NPT framework.
Korea has been promoting the peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy as part of a comprehensive national policy, including radioisotope applications in industry, medicine and agriculture. We have established ourselves as one of the largest generators of nuclear power in the world. At present, 16 nuclear power plants are in operation, providing 44% of the total electricity supply for the country, and 4 more units are under construction. To meet the growing electricity demand, my country has developed the Korean Standard Nuclear Power Plant (KSNP), which upgrades the safety and reliability compared with existing nuclear reactors. With experience and know-how, Korea is redoubling its R&D efforts into the area of small and medium-sized reactors to be used for co-generation and desalination.
Mr. Chairman.
As called for by the decision on P&O of 1995, my delegation shares the view that particular importance should be attached to ensuring the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy - for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the Treaty. We believe that more benefits should be provided for those non-nuclear-weapon states that comply fully with their NPT obligations regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Those non-nuclear-weapon states are entitled to acquiring nuclear technologies and know-how, including a stable supply of nuclear fuel. On the other hand, strict sanctions should be imposed on those states that remain outside the Treaty or do not fulfill their obligations under the Treaty.
The international community has benefited from the use of nuclear energy to a degree unparalleled in history, but not without undesirable consequences. In today's deregulated energy environment, the nuclear industry is faced with the twin challenges of ensuring economic competitiveness and promoting public acceptance.
Nuclear safety and environmental management must be of the most utmost concern in future considerations for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Last year's Tokaimura accident in Japan has reawakened the international community to the importance of nuclear safety. We share the view that every country should, through rigorous national measures and international cooperation, maintain the highest possible levels of nuclear safety. It is imperative that every country should take concrete steps to relieve public concern about the operational safety of nuclear power plants and the disposal of radioactive waste. Under these circumstances, all countries should redouble their efforts to implement standards and guidelines in the accounting, physical protection and transport of nuclear materials. In this regard, we welcome the successful outcome of the first Review Meeting of the Convention on Nuclear Safety held in April 1999. My delegation hopes that all contracting parties will continue to make every effort to fulfill the objectives of the Convention.
The world is also confronted with difficulties in nuclear power generation, mainly due to the nuclear waste management problem. We recognize the importance of "the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management", and look forward to its early entry into force. My delegation would like to call upon those states that have not yet done so to accede to all relevant conventions as soon as possible and to fully implement their ensuing commitments.
Mr. Chairman,
The IAEA plays an important role in the transfer of nuclear technology and development assistance. My delegation shares the view that the IAEA should be given greater authority and responsibility. We believe that the IAEA, as the primary facilitator of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should be provided with the necessary financial and human resources to carry out all its tasks in the areas of technical cooperation, safeguards and nuclear safety.
Thank you.

