STATEMENT
BY
AMBASSADOR XOLISA MABHONGO,
RESIDENT REPRESENTATlVElGOVERNOR
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TO THE IAEA

FIRST PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE
OF THE PARTIES TO THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
CLUSTER Ill: PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

9 MAY 2012
VIENNA

Check against delivery

Chairperson,
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement.
Chairperson,
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the only
international instrument that contains both the legal commitment to the elimination of
nuclear weapons and measures to prevent nuclear proliferation, whilst recognizing
the inalienable right of States Parties to the NPT to the peaceful use of nuclear
science, technologies and applications pursuant to Article IV of the Treaty.
South Africa was encouraged by the momentum gained at the 2010 Review
Conference through the adoption of the Action Plan but it is imperative that all States
Parties be held fully accountable for strict compliance with their obligations under the
NPT and strive to implement the actions agreed upon in the final 2010 document.
Chairperson,
In view of concerns regarding energy security and climate change as well as the
importance of promoting economic development, it is expected that the international
community will see a substantial increase in the development of nuclear plans for the
production of electricity. This anticipated expanded use of nuclear energy has
prompted some States to express concerns about proliferation and propose
restrictions and controls over the legitimate peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
On several occasions, South Africa reconfirmed its view that peaceful nuclear cooperation and access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, pursuant
to Article IV of the NPT, are integral parts of the Treaty. The inalienable right on the
peaceful use of nuclear technology as recognized in the Treaty is of particular
relevance and importance to the African continent, based on the need for sustainable
and accelerated economic growth in the region.
At the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit President Zuma remarked in this context (and
I quote), "nuclear energy provides not only for the expanded opportunity to generate
power needed for our development. We also derive infinite value from its application
to health, nutrition and agriculture. Our international legally binding obligations on
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation allow for the enrichment of
uranium for peaceful purposes."(Unquote)
Chairperson,
Due to decreasing natural resources, global warming, climate change, pollution and
rapid global growth, security of energy supply has become an issue that ranges high
on the agenda worldwide. African countries, too, are increasingly faced with the
challenge of increasing energy demands, and are looking towards including the
nuclear option in their energy mix.
As more and more countries turn to nuclear energy production and other civilian
nuclear applications South Africa believes that the IAEA could play an increasing role
in the future,. Therefore, my delegation continues to attach great importance to the
promotional role of the Agency, as set out in Article II of the IAEA Statute, aiming to
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world.

Chairperson
The IAEA's TC programme has proven to be of strategic importance to developing
countries, particularly in the African region, and can provide the necessary impuls for
accelerated economic development. Many of the IAEA's TC projects thus play a
valuable role in the achievement of the MDGs and have made meaningful
contributions towards the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
contributing in particular towards the alleviation of poverty on the continent.
South Africa recognizes the role of agriculture in enhancing the development of the
countries in the Southern African region and the potential devastating consequences,
which the spread of transboundary animal diseases could have, in particular,
diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease, rift valley fever, sheep pox and goat pox,
African horse sickness and African swine fever, if not detected and treated at an
early stage. Furthermore, within Africa there are limited national and regional
capacities for the early and rapid diagnosis and control of various animal diseases,
and, therefore, an over-reliance on the diagnostic capabilities of laboratories situated
outside of Africa.
Chairperson,
Against this background, and the demonstrated successes of the Joint FAO-IAEA
Division on Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture, the Government of the
Republic of South Africa announced in 2011 that it has extended to the IAEA a formal
offer to support specific efforts to improve veterinary laboratory capacities in SubSaharan African countries. To that end, the Government of the Republic of South
Africa, through its African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund, has
pledged R15,000,000.00 (Fifteen million Rand), approximately Euro 1,5 million, to
support such laboratory capacity activities. The project duration is approximately four
years and the total project cost amounts to Euro 3 million, The project is a
collaborative effort between South Africa, the United States of America, the IAEA and
FAO. South Africa encourages other States Parties to make contributions to the
project and commends the USA for its contribution within the context of the Peaceful
Uses Initiative.
South Africa attaches great importance to the Agency's TC Programme and has
successfully participated in national and regional AFRA projects. Upon South Africa's
initiative, the Agency was also instrumental in the establishment of the Forum of
Nuclear Regulatory Bodies in Africa (FNRBA), seeking cooperation and peer review
amongst the regulatory bodies in the region. AFRA and the Agency will also
contribute to the work of the African Commission on Nuclear Energy (AFCONE),
established in 201Iunder the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Pelindaba
Treaty).
Chairperson,
The 2010 Review Conference Action Plan accentuates what South Africa has
consistently repeated at the meetings of the IAEA Board and the NPT, namely that
every effort should be made to ensure that IAEA resources for technical cooperation
activities are sufficient, assured and predictable and that continued efforts should be
made within the IAEA to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of its technical
cooperation programme. With the increasing demands made on the Agency, it is
South Africa's view that securing sufficient, assured and predictable funding for TC
projects now requires urgent priority.

In order for the IAEA to continue to utilize its expertise and know-how to the fullest
benefit of Member States through its TC programme South Africa believes that TC
Fund should be incorporated into the Agency's regular budget. Valuabre initiatives
such as the PUI, that aim to provide extra-budgetary assistance for TC projects that
otherwise remain unfunded, can only be a temporary measure in view of the growing
demand for technical assistance from the Agency.
Chairperson,
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the strength, credibility and continuity of
the NPT rests on a fundamental bargain of the States Parties to the NPT, which must
be recognized and upheld, rather than being used by some to serve selective
interests through the perpetuation of discrimination and imbalance. The Treaty, the
steps and actions agreed upon by Review Conferences must be implemented
equally in all its aspects without favour or prejudice. As a multilateral legally-binding
instrument, which was negotiated and equally agreed to by the members of the
international community, nothing in the Treaty shall be compromised, including the
very important aspect of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology.

