•

2018-05-01 Check against delivery!

NPT Prep Com 2018 – Cluster III – Statement by Sweden

Mr Chair,

Sweden aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union under this
cluster. Our general priorities are also reflected in the comprehensive working
papers prepared by the European Union and the Vienna Group of Ten. In
addition, I would like to make the following remarks in a national capacity.

Mr Chair,

All Parties to the Treaty are granted an inalienable right to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful uses. This right is to be exercised
without discrimination and in conformity with articles I, II and III of the NPT. The
IAEA makes an essential contribution in advancing article IV of the treaty,
including through the Peaceful Uses Initiative and through its Technical
Cooperation Programme.

Peaceful uses of nuclear energy can play a role in realizing the Sustainable
Development Goals. In line with our Government’s priorities, Sweden has in 2018
pledged extrabudgetary funding to the IAEA in the fields of ocean acidification,
marine plastics and water resource management in Africa.

Mr Chair,

Sweden emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and the
development of common approaches for nuclear safety. At the 7th Review Meeting
of the Convention on Nuclear Safety Sweden reaffirmed its commitment and
fulfillment of obligations under the Convention. This includes adoption of the
principles and objectives of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety as
cornerstones of nuclear safety. We look forward to further work, efforts and
discussions with the aim of enhancing Nuclear Safety worldwide.

Sweden strongly believes that peer review mechanisms contribute to further
strengthening nuclear safety and security as well as building confidence. We
encourage the sharing of best practices and results from peer review missions.
Sweden recently initiated the process aiming at inviting the next IRRS mission. Our
ambition is that it will be conducted in 2022, at the latest. Reports from earlier
missions are easily accessible on the website of the Swedish Radiation Safety
Authority.

It is important not to perceive nuclear safety and security as obstacles to the
development and use of peaceful nuclear energy. The highest standards of nuclear
safety and security underpin peaceful uses. Commitment to these standards
facilitate the transfer of knowledge and international cooperation. Sweden has a
long-standing cooperation with various countries as regards safety and security.

The entry into force of the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection on Nuclear Material is a welcome development and Sweden looks
forward to its universalization. We urge all states that have not already done so, to
become party to the amended Convention and to ratify and implement the

amendment as soon as possible. Its entry into force will create additional
momentum for future IAEA actions in this area including the preparation for the
first Conference of State Parties.

I thank you Mr Chair!

