
Mr Chairman,
The right to peaceful use of nuclear energy as enshrined in Article IV of the NPT is one of the central elements
of the Treaty and the implementation of that provision is a matter of vital importance. Switzerland is pleased
to note that significant progress has been made in implementing the actions agreed in 2010 for the third pillar.
Switzerland is of the view that the inalienable right to peaceful use of nuclear energy under the NPT should be
accompanied by certain responsibilities. In this respect, my delegation would like to highlight the following four
points:


First. Nuclear Safety is a prerequisite for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. At the same time, peaceful
use goes hand in hand with the responsibility of States to provide and maintain high levels of nuclear
safety. The accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in March 2011 was a wake-up call for
all and reminded stakeholders of the importance of continuous improvement of nuclear safety worldwide.
As outlined and further explained in the Swiss Working Paper on Nuclear Safety, we consider the following
elements to be of great importance. The concept of timely implementing safety improvements that are
reasonably practicable or achievable at new or existing nuclear power plants as defined in the principles
of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety should apply to all aspects of nuclear safety. Establishing an
effective and independent regulatory body is key in order to ensure that the regulatory judgements can be
made without pressure from interests that may conflict with safety. Becoming a party to the Convention on
Nuclear Safety (CNS) and the Joint Convention, the only internationally legally binding instruments in the
field of nuclear safety, enables States Parties to review and strengthen their nuclear safety approaches
internationally. Finally, Switzerland encourages States Parties to design and implement safety and security
measures in an integrated manner so that security measures do not compromise safety and safety
measures do not compromise security.



Second. Nuclear security is the other side of the coin with respect to peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Although nuclear security is the responsibility of each State it has to be considered as a global issue and
efforts at the multinational level therefore must be reinforced since an act of nuclear terrorism could have
repercussions far beyond a State’s own borders. Switzerland thus calls on all States that have not yet
done so to accede to the instruments of the multilateral nuclear security architecture, namely the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its 2005 Amendment, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Code of Conduct on the
Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources. Switzerland also supports the efforts of the IAEA to coordinate
the various nuclear security initiatives in the multilateral framework.
Switzerland would like to underline that the sole focus on nuclear materials used for peaceful purposes is
not sufficient. The multilateral nuclear security architecture cannot be considered comprehensive as long
as it does not also cover nuclear material used for military purposes. This is of particular importance since
this material accounts for about 83% of the world's total nuclear material and is by far the most sensitive.
We regret that neither in the context of the NPT nor at the most recent IAEA Ministerial Conference on
3

Nuclear Security of 2016 this fact was clearly recognised. Switzerland therefore will continue its efforts to
promote a global and comprehensive approach to nuclear security.



Third. The IAEA technical cooperation in various fields and in cooperation with other international
organizations represents an essential contribution to the sustainable development as well as the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. It is therefore in the interest of all Member States of
the IAEA - whether donors or recipients - to ensure that the resources available are used effectively to
achieve maximum results. Switzerland supports the view that each MS benefiting from technical
cooperation should fully pay its financial contribution for the implementation of its national TC programs.
This should be the basic underlying principle.



Fourth and final point concerning the responsibility of States with regard to nuclear non-proliferation. There
is a number of States that is unlikely to join the NPT in the near future, but nonetheless benefits from
cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Despite their absence from the NPT, those States also
have a responsibility with regard to non-proliferation. Switzerland calls on them to adopt non-proliferation
norms and commitments that are both binding and equivalent to those of State Parties to the NPT, in order
to make a concrete and substantive contribution to the universal strengthening of the nuclear nonproliferation regime.

I thank you for your attention.

4

