
Mr Chairman ,
In 2010, the NPT Review Conference adopted more than twenty measures on the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. Most of these measures concern the right to nuclear cooperation. This is an essential aspect,
because the inalienable right of States Parties to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is one of the
elements of the compromise that gave birth to the NPT. Switzerland welcomes the fact that the
implementation of the measures adopted under this pillar of the 2010 Action Plan is on the right track.
Mr Chairman,
Switzerland would nevertheless like to take this opportunity to underscore the challenges it foresees in the
area of the peaceful use of nuclear energy in the years ahead. I will note the following points in this regard.
1. First, during the thematic debate on non-proliferation, Switzerland recalled that the right to nuclear
cooperation goes hand in hand with the respect of non-proliferation obligations. My country emphasised
that the work currently being carried out by the IAEA on the evolution of safeguards implementation
would be decisive. In fact, this work will shape the way we will implement our non-proliferation
commitments over the long term. The IAEA is currently working on its safeguards system to make it less
mechanistic and to take into account the specificities of each country, without losing its effectiveness. As
already mentioned, my delegation submitted a working paper about this issue during this second session
of the Preparatory Committee. Switzerland encourages all States Parties to support the IAEA's
conceptual work. This work will to lead to a more efficient use of the AIEA's resources in fulfilling its
verification mandate and will enable the Agency to step up its activities in the field of nuclear safety and
security, where greater involvement by the IAEA is expected.
2.

Second, the Fukushima nuclear accident tragically reconfirmed the responsibility of States with respect
to nuclear safety and the need to strive for a policy of absolute nuclear safety.
Switzerland welcomes the efforts undertaken to date by the AIEA, particularly those related to the 2011
Action Plan on nuclear safety. My country strongly encourages the States Parties to fully implement this
Action Plan as quickly as possible. In particular, Switzerland has called for the implementation of peer
reviews on a more regular basis. It has also advocated for greater transparency from the competent
national authorities, both with regards to the publication of their national reports as well as to the
implementation of the peer review recommendations. Lastly, Switzerland has supported the use of the
most modern and effective nuclear safety requirements.
In addition, my country is working to strengthen the Convention on Nuclear Safety and is actively
participating in the "Efficiency and Transparency" working group, which is tasked with formulating by
2014 concrete proposals to strengthen this Convention. My delegation also encourages the States that
have not already done so to accede to this Convention and to implement as soon as possible the various
codes of conduct on nuclear safety.
All these efforts aim to find the most appropriate multilateral measures to minimize the risks of another
major nuclear accident. However, Switzerland believes that, to this end , it will ultimately also be
necessary to identify new avenues to go beyond the 2011 Action Plan. Given its global nature, the AIEA
is the best platform for the international community to achieve this goal.

3.

Third, Switzerland welcomes the decision of the AIEA Director General to convene a ministerial
conference on nuclear security. My country considers that the primary responsibility for nuclear security
lies with the States. Nevertheless, as nuclear security is a global challenge, existing initiatives, both at
the regional of global level, need to be better coordinated. Because of its global nature, the AIEA is the
most appropriate platform to perform such a task.
Switzerland calls on the States Parties that have not yet done so to adhere and to implement all nuclear
security instruments, particularly the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its Amendment.

Thank you, Mr Chairman, for your attention.

