Mr Chairman,
The right to peaceful use of nuclear energy is one of the central elements of the NPT and the
implementation of that provision is a matter of vital importance. While the production of electric power
and scientific research are certainly the principal considerations in this regard, nuclear applications, for
instance, in the domains of public health and the environment are also attracting growing interest.
Examples of this may be seen in the IAEA’s technical cooperation programme and in other activities
such as the Peaceful Uses Initiative, PUI, of which Switzerland is a member.
Today, as we are at the beginning of a new review cycle, Switzerland is pleased to note that
significant progress has been made in implementing the actions agreed in 2010 for the third pillar.
Switzerland is of the view that the inalienable right to peaceful use of nuclear energy under the NPT
should be accompanied by certain responsibilities. My delegation would like to draw particular
attention to four of those.
First, the responsibility of States with regard to nuclear non-proliferation. My delegation has
already spoken on this matter in its earlier statements. I would like to add here however, that there
is a number of States that are unlikely to join the NPT in the near future, but nonetheless benefit
from cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Despite their absence from the NPT,
those States also have a responsibility with regard to non-proliferation. Switzerland calls on them
to adopt non-proliferation norms and commitments that are both binding and equivalent to those of
State Parties to the NPT, in order to make a concrete and substantive contribution to the universal
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Second. Peaceful use of nuclear energy goes hand in hand with the responsibility of States with
regard to nuclear safety. The Fukushima accident reminded us of this imperative. Switzerland has
been strongly committed in strengthening the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the CNS. Our
country played a leading role in the adoption of the Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety in
February 2015 and its incorporation last April as the new reporting standard for future Review
Meetings of the CNS.
In addition, Switzerland will continue to devote its efforts towards strengthening nuclear safety,
also by working for the adoption of an IAEA safety strategy that includes a hierarchy of priorities
and clear performance indicators.
Third. The same applies to the responsibility of States with regard to nuclear security. Because an
act of nuclear terrorism could have repercussions far beyond a State’s own borders, strengthening
nuclear security must also be considered as a global concern and efforts at the multinational level
must be reinforced. Switzerland thus calls on all States that have not yet done so to accede to the
instruments of the multilateral nuclear security architecture, namely the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) and its 2005 Amendment, the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Code of Conduct on the

3

Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources. Switzerland also supports the efforts of the IAEA to
coordinate the various nuclear security initiatives in the multilateral framework.
Switzerland would like to underline that, by focusing its efforts only on the materials used for
peaceful purposes, the multilateral nuclear security architecture cannot be considered
comprehensive as long as it does not cover nuclear material used for military purposes, which is
the most sensitive and represents around 85% of the world’s nuclear material. The IAEA
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Security of last December did not succeed in fully recognizing
this fact. Switzerland will continue its efforts to promote a global and comprehensive approach to
nuclear security.
Fourth and final point. Switzerland is of the view that every State benefiting from the IAEA
technical cooperation in the field of peaceful applications of nuclear energy must – as a matter of
principle – make full payment of its contribution to the implementation of its national programs
within the framework of such technical cooperation. In that respect, Switzerland urges all Member
States to continue the discussions on the revision of the “due-account mechanism” with a view to
find a consensus as soon as possible.
I thank you for your attention.

4

