We note that for several years the production of electricity from nuclear power has become the objective of an increasingly large number of States due to the growing demand for electricity and the imperatives imposed by various ecological factors.
As for Switzerland - where about 40% of the electricity supply is generated by nuclear energy - the replacement of existing nuclear power stations by new ones in the coming decades is an option that is now frequently being discussed.
Mr President,
If it is trivial to declare that there is a link between the increase in nuclear energy production and the higher risk of nuclear proliferation - and of nuclear terrorism - my delegation however would like to recall that for more than 20 years the States Parties of the NPT have taken initiatives and developed instruments to strengthen confidence in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In this context, we would like to mention the following:
■	the application of the comprehensive safeguards (INFCIRC 153) since 1983 and their strengthening as of 1993.
■	the introduction of the comprehensive safeguards as a condition of supply in the "Principles and objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament" which was adopted with the indefinite prolongation of the NPT in 1995.
■	the adoption of the Additional Protocol (INFCIRC 540) in 1997, and
• other instruments including the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials.
My country urges ail States Parties of the NPT that have not already done so to accede to all these instruments without further delay. Furthermore, we would like to mention the various initiatives to combat proliferation of the G8 Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction.
Deliberations on meeting the requirements of both non-proliferation and on the peaceful use of nuclear energy have been continuing in order to focus on the multilateralisation of the nuclear fuel cycle. Since the publication of the report in 2005 by the IAEA experts group, several initiatives in this field have been launched either by individual countries or by groups of States. The IAEA has compiled them in its report of 13 June 2007 entitled "Possible new framework for the use of nuclear energy: options to ensure the supply of nuclear fuel".
Mr President,
The discussion on access to the nuclear fuel cycle is not new, and in fact started at the beginning of the nuclear age. This process has had the merit of launching the debate on a problem which is growing with the increase in civilian nuclear programmes and installations throughout the world.
For its part, Switzerland wishes to present those elements which form the basis of its position in the debate on access to the nuclear fuel cycle:
1.	Switzerland attaches paramount importance to the inalienable right to the development of research, cooperation, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT.
2.	Switzerland cannot as a consequence accept proposals which, in principle, aim to restrict access to nuclear fuel-cycle technologies for the Non-Nuclear-Weapon States Parties - and as such not in possession of such technologies - on the pretext of limiting the risks of proliferation. It believes that such proposals would unjustifiably discriminate against these States.
3.	Switzerland is aware that some sensitive areas of the nuclear fuel cycle, such as enrichment and recycling, require particular attention due to the inherent risks of proliferation. For this reason, we consider that the debate on procedures concerning restrictions on access to the nuclear fuel cycle should take place within the framework of the NPT, and that it should apply as a criterion compliance or non-compliance of a States Party to all the provisions of the NPT.
Mr President, thank you for your attention.

