Mr. Chairman,
We reaffirm Syria's full compliance with the NPT Provisions and the IAEA safeguards regime, and we reaffirm that the American allegations against Syria are mere fabrications aiming to further destabilize the Middle East and to prevent this session from reaching any concrete results.
Mr. Chairman,
The United States has a huge record of violation of the NPT provisions and international law.It is continuing to provide Israel, a non-party to the NPT, with all kinds of nuclear technologies and materials.
The US's nuclear cooperation with Israel, as hard evidenced after the agreement reached during the US Energy Secretary's visit to Israel in February 2000, is in fact another aspect of violations of the Treaty. This agreement which was claimed for peaceful purposes and nuclear cooperation between United States and Israel is a clear violation of Article III, which stipulates that cooperation of each State Party to the Treaty in providing equipment or material for peaceful purposes is not possible "unless the source or special fissionable material shall be subject to the safeguards required by" the NPT. Israel unsafeguarded nuclear weapon facilities and nuclear arsenal is a real threat to all countries of the region and to the international peace and security. Very recently, a new agreement was signed by the director of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, and the chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, enabling Israel to access most of the latest nuclear data and technology available in the U.S which is
another US non-compliance with the provisions of the NPT. The US disclosed "top secret document dated 23 August 1974" clearly shows the role of the US in equipping Israel with nuclear weapons.
The USA has trnsfered hundreds of nuclear weapons to certain non-nuclear weapon States. The United States deployed nuclear weapons in other countries are extremely integrated into the military infrastructure of the countries hosting these weapons.
The United States, in violations of the NPT provisions, continued to develop tactical nuclear weapons, and included the possible use of these weapons in their military plans and doctrines. In this regard, the American journalist, Seymour Hersh, reported in April 2006, that one of the plans, to attack a country which is a state party to the NPT in full complince with its provisions , presented to the white house by the Pentagon, entails the use of a Bunker-Buster tactical nuclear weapon (The Telegraph, 09/04/2006). In January , 2007, it has been reported that Israel has drawn up secret plans to attack this state with tactical nuclear weapons.
The United States, in violations of international law, used new weapons that caused huge human, material and environmental casualties, and mysterious symptoms. In this regard, we present here some findings:
I- The Centre for Research on Globalisation and BBC online published an article written by Alex Kirby1, entitled:
Did the US used tactical nuclear weapons in Afghanistan?
Here are some quotes from this article:
New bioassay studies identify uranium internal contamination in Spin Gar (Tora Bora) area and the City of Kabul are up to 200 times the level of the unexposed population. Surface water, rice fields and catch-basins adjacent to and surrounding the bombsites have high values of uranium, up to 27 times normal.
A small sample of Afghan civilians have shown "astonishing" levels of uranium in their urine, an independent scientist says.
1 BBC, 23 May 2003. www.globalresearch.ca 29 May 2003
"The results were astounding: the donors presented concentrations of toxic and radioactive uranium isotopes between 100 and 400 times greater than in the Gulf veterans tested in 1999."
Dr Asaf Durakovic, of the Uranium Medical Research Center (UMRC) based in Washington DC., and a former US army colonel who is now a professor of medicine, said: "Independent monitoring of the weapon types and delivery systems indicate that radioactive, toxic uranium alloys and hard-target uranium warheads were being used by the coalition forces."
Bomb damage was widespread...Without exception, every person donating urine specimens tested positive for uranium internal contamination.
Dr Durakovic's team used as a control group three Afghans who showed no signs of contamination. They averaged 9.4 nanograms of uranium per litre of urine. The average for his 17 "randomly-selected" patients was 315.5 nanograms, he said. Some were from Jalalabad, and others from Kabul, Tora Bora, and Mazar-e-Sharif. A 12-year-old boy living near Kabul had 2,031 nanograms.
A second UMRC visit to Afghanistan in September 2002 found "a potentially much broader area and larger population of contamination". It collected 25 more urine samples, which bore out the findings from the earlier group.
Quotes from UMRC Field Team's Trip Report
"The UMRC field team was shocked by the breadth of public health impacts coincident with the bombing. Without exception, at every bombsite investigated, people are ill. A significant portion of the civilian population presents symptoms consistent with internal contamination by Uranium."
"They (the bombs) combined significant explosive force with hard-target penetration features. These weapons punched through three or more layers composed of steel reinforced roofs and two or more concrete walls without detonating. They then passed through the concrete floor/foundation slabs, to bury 3 to 4 meters in the earth before exploding."
II- in Decembre 2001, The Centre for Research, on Globalisation (CRG), has also published an article written by Michel Chossudovsky, a Professor of Economics at the University of Ottawa , entitled:
"Tactical Nuclear Weapons" against Afghanistan?2
2 globalresearch.ca, 5 December 2001
Here are some quotes from this article:
The US Air Force is using GBU-28 "bunker buster bombs" ...While the Pentagon's "Big Ones" are classified as "conventional weapons", the official statements fail to mention that the same "bunker buster bombs" launched from a B-52, a B-2 stealth bomber or an F-16 aircraft can also be equipped with a nuclear device. The B61-11 is the " nuclear version" of its "conventional" BLU-113 counterpart. The B61-11 was developed from the old "conventional" B61-7 "gravity bomb."
The B61-11 is the "nuclear version" of the "conventional" BLU-113. The Belli is categorised as a "deep earth penetrating bomb" capable of "destroying the deepest and most hardened of underground bunkers, which the conventional warheads are not capable of doing". The B61-1 Is can be delivered in much same way as the conventional GBU, from a B-2. a 5B-2 stealth bomber or from an F-16 aircraft.
The Bush Administration has not excluded the use of the B61-11 in Afghanistan, which is categorised as "a tactical nuclear weapon". Secretary of Defence Donald Rumsfeld, has stated that while the "conventional" bunker buster bombs are going to be able to do the job1, ... he did not rule out the eventual use of nuclear weapons."
Mr. Chairman,
McNamara,former Defense Secretary, was quoted (Foreign Policy, 5-6/05) bluntly declaring the U.S. a nuclear outlaw: "I would characterize current U.S. nuclear weapons policy as immoral, illegal, militarily unnecessary and dreadfully dangerous."
In a Washington Post op-ed (3/28/05), the fomer USA President, Carter wrote: "While claiming to be protecting the world from proliferation threats in Iraq, Libya, Iran and North Korea, American leaders not only have abandoned existing treaty restraints but also have asserted plans to test and develop new weapons."