
Thailand associates itself with the statement on Cluster III as delivered yesterday by the distinguished representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My delegation reaffirms its commitment to the inalienable right of States to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes prescribed in Article IV of the Treaty. We also wish to emphasize that such inalienable right is inextricably linked to the issues of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and safeguards as provided for in Articles I, II andUL
Against the backdrop of the energy and food crises that the world is facing, we need to ponder the question of energy security in a comprehensive manner. My delegation views the peaceful use of nuclear power as an engine for development towards the future. It not only offers a viable alternative source of energy, but it should also help mitigate climate change and other environmental concerns. The so-called "Nuclear Renaissance" reflects the reality that more and more countries are renewing interest in launching nuclear power programmes.
On the part of Thailand, the decision to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is high on our agenda. Last year, the Thai Government approved the National Power Development Plan for 2007-2021. The Pian calls for the construction of 4 nuclear power plants that will generate 4,000 Megawatts of nuclear-powered electricity by the year 2020 and 2021 respectively. In this regard, Thailand has established a new governmental agency and committee to assume overall responsibility for preparation of the nuclear power infrastructure and other relevant issues.
While the current expansion and long term growth prospects for nuclear power are centered in Asia, we also recognize that many countries in this region attach great importance to the issue of nuclear safety, and rightfully so. This is considered a crucial prerequisite to ensure public confidence and support to any such programme. In this connection, Thailand will be hosting the ASEAN Plus Three Forum on Nuclear Energy
Safety in Bangkok in June of this year. The meeting is aimed at raising awareness of the international regulations on nuclear safety and waste management in the ASEAN countries as well as examining the important aspects of technology transfer and capacity building. In this regard, my delegation would like to underscore the importance of the Asian Nuclear Safety Network, or ANSN, as a regional coordinating mechanism that oversees nuclear safety in our region. We need to build on this existing experience and reinforce the close cooperation with the IAEA within the context of this Network.
Mr. Chairman,
Apart from the nuclear power plants, we need to recognize the spin-off benefits of nuclear technology that contribute to the advancement of human security around the world. Nuclear applications in the fields of agriculture, nutrition, human health, water resources management and marine environment, among many others, have created conditions conducive to achieving food security, community self-reliance, and national production. In this regard, Thailand appreciates and commends the work of the IAEA in supporting the Millennium Development Goals as well as the Agenda 21 principles of sustainable development.
Thailand also believes that technical cooperation constitutes one of the most important statutory pillars of the IAEA. TC activities are instrumental in transferring nuclear technology to, and enhancing the capacity of, Member States towards peaceful socio-economic development. The active collaboration between Thailand and the Agency in this regard has been a major drive towards our shared responsibility. We wish to reaffirm our continuing support for the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Fund (TCF), as it becomes increasingly evident that the Agency would require "sufficient, assured, and predictable " resources in order to fulfill its ever-expanding tasks.
With regard to the assurance of nuclear fuel supply, my delegation is of the view that the issue is very complex and entails multi-dimensional technical, legal, commercial and economic implications. As such, it may require further examination. Undoubtedly,
the reliable supply of nuclear fuel is essential to the development of nuclear power programmes. Yet we would like to emphasize that such a concept should not in any way infringe upon the inalienable rights of Member States to research, develop and use all aspects of nuclear science and technology for peaceful puiposes. While noting that there have been several proposals made on this issue, we believe that the IAEA should be at the center of such mechanism. Thailand welcomes further consultations on the issue and believes that efforts towards bringing this matter forward will have to be negotiated within the framework of the IAEA.
Mr. Chairman,
The peaceful uses of nuclear energy can be a key to helping us attain freedom from want and freedom from fear. At the end of the day, we need to ensure that the harnessing of such technology does yield positive impacts and benefits for humanity. Nevertheless, our inalienable right to do so should not be viewed in isolation from the overall objectives of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. We must strengthen our endeavor so as to strike an adequate balance in assuring a healthy future for nuclear energy.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.