Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY TURKEY

at
the Ist Preparatory Committee
for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Cluster III debate
(10 May 2017, Vienna)

0

Check against delivery

Mr. Chairman,
Turkey strongly supports the inalienable right of states to benefit from the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy as stipulated in Article IV of the NPT.
The NPT fosters the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by providing a
framework of confidence and cooperation on the basis of which those uses can take place.
Nuclear power, science and technology and their peaceful applications have made substantial
contributions to improving the quality of life and the well-being of people around the world.
Non-power nuclear applications, although often overlooked, have expanded to become a
nearly constant factor in all aspects of daily life, from fighting hunger and poverty, to
conservation of the environment and human health.
As an embarking country, developing its own nuclear power programme, peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and its applications have priority for Turkey. We remain committed to
contributing to the responsible development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the best
safety, security and non-proliferation conditions. This is essential to maintaining the balance
between rights and obligations of States Parties under the Treaty and constitutes an integral
element of the NPT’s grand bargain.
While nuclear safety and security are both responsibilities of the individual state, Turkey
recognizes that, the use of nuclear energy must be accompanied at all stages by commitments
to, and ongoing implementation of safeguards. Appropriate and effective levels of safety and
security, consistent with States Parties’ national legislation and respective international
obligations, must not be overlooked.
Mr. Chairman,
It is important that all Parties to the NPT, without discrimination, should have the means and
the guidance to benefit from nuclear technology. In this regard, we stress the key role played
by the IAEA by providing technical assistance to states in all aspects of peaceful use.
Turkey acknowledges that, the development of an appropriate infrastructure to support the
safe, secure and efficient use of nuclear power, in line with relevant IAEA standards and
guidelines, is an issue of central importance, especially for States that are planning for the
introduction of nuclear power to their energy mix.
The IAEA, with its vast expertise and customized technical support, has a central role,
through setting international safety and verification standards. Bearing in mind the increasing
number of countries considering introducing or expanding the use of nuclear power and
radiation technology, and the importance of international cooperation to strengthen nuclear
and radiation safety, including through bilateral or multilateral mechanisms among states, the
IAEA’s services are indispensable.

1

Check against delivery
Turkey attaches utmost importance to the Agency’s safety standards and carefully follows
Agency recommendations to obtain an advanced level of safety and security in its nuclear
power programme. We utilize the Agency’s support services in appropriate phases of our
nuclear programme both from regulator and utility aspects. In recent years, we hosted several
IAEA review missions in this field.
In addition to peer review missions, the Technical Cooperation Program (TCP) is the most
direct and tangible service of the Agency, geared towards introducing and improving
peaceful uses worldwide. We support the contribution the Agency makes to Sustainable
Development Goals through the TCP.
The Nuclear Analytical Laboratories at Seibersdorf are an important asset of the IAEA which
enables the Agency to respond to a wide range of requests and emergencies around the globe.
In line with the importance Turkey attaches to strengthening the Agency’s peaceful use
activities, it has given financial support to the renovation of these laboratories this year.
In this regard, Turkey is of the view that, the Agency has to be adequately financed in order
to deliver on its myriad critical responsibilities.
Mr. Chairman,
By way of conclusion, I would like to point out to the NPDI working paper entitled
“Promotion of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy” which highlights the steps that all parties to
the NPT can take in this pillar, thereby enhancing the implementation of the Treaty and
contributing to the strengthening of its three mutually reinforcing pillars.
Thank you.

2

