Turkey's energy policy is aimed at ensuring a secure, sustainable and competitive energy supply for its needs. It is designed to sustain targeted economic and social growth in the long run.
Securing Turkey's energy supplies requires the utilization of our domestic resources to the highest possible extent and the diversification of our imports in terms of source and variety.
In this context, we aim to diversity the portfolio of our electricity generation options and to reduce our heavy dependence on imported fossil fuels. Given its well-proven safety record and cost effectiveness, nuclear power is estimated to be one of the major components of our energy supply mix in the medium to long term. In fact, our electricity supply and demand studies point to the need for the commissioning of nuclear power plants into the Turkish electricity grid during the next decade. We expect that nuclear power will contribute to around 5 to 6 percent of our total installed capacity by the year 2020.
Mr. Chairman,
Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is one of the fundamental objectives of the NPT. We believe that the role of the IAEA is essential in assisting developing States parties in the peaceful use of nuclear energy through the development of effective programs aimed at improving their scientific, technological and regulatory capabilities.
We also appreciate the Agency's role in providing guidance to Member States in launching a nuclear power program for the first time. We shall continue to cooperate closely and fully with the Agency both in launching and operating our prospective nuclear energy program.
Mr. Chairman,
Turkey is fully supportive of the greatest possible enjoyment of the benefits of nuclear energy for NPT States that are in full compliance with their Treaty obligations. At the same time, we believe that all necessaiy steps need to be taken in order to ensure that there will be no increased risk of proliferation associated with the expansion of nuclear energy. It should be borne in mind that non-proliferation and peaceful uses of nuclear energy are two complementary and mutually reinforcing pillars of the Treaty.
Development of a new framework for the utilization of nuclear energy, based on multilateral approaches to the fuel cycle, has been receiving notable interest recently. An important consideration in this framework is that States need to be confident that they would be able to obtain their nuclear fuel in a predictable, stable and cost-effective manner over the long term.
In this context, the right of each NPT State to decide on matters concerning the development of its own national fuel cycle capabilities should also be respected. This is a sovereign right of all NPT States emanating from Article IV of the Treaty. This means multilateral fuel cycle mechanisms need to be based on the principle of voluntary participation. In other words, it should be up to States to decide whether they wish to participate in the further development and implementation of the proposals on the assurances of fuel supply.
In addition, States which may decide to join such a multilateral arrangement would need to have confidence in a we 11-functioning market. They would also wish to have back-up mechanisms that would protect themselves from politically-motivated disruptions.
Turkey has been closely following the developments to establish a new framework for assurance of supply of nuclear fuel. Our observation is that involvement in this subject has been to a great extent limited to the States that are on the supply-side of the equation. We believe that a more active involvement of those States that are placed on the demand-side would remedy this shortfall.
Turkey welcomes the IAEA's efforts on establishing a new framework for assurance of supply of nuclear fuel. We believe that the Agency should continue to play a central role in this area.
I would like to conclude by expressing our strong support to the Agency's Technical Cooperation Program. We see this Program as an important instrument for extending assistance, in various humanitarian areas, to countries which are in need.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.