THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND

CLUSTER 3 ISSUES STATEMENT
to the

THIRD PREPARATORY COMMITTEE OF THE
2015 REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE TREATY ON
THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR
WEAPONS
By

Dr. Matthew Rowland
Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the
Conference on Disarmament
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations in Geneva

New York, 5 May 2014
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr. Chairman,
1. The UK would like to align itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union. I should like, in addition, to highlight one or
two key issues in a national capacity relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

2. The role that civil nuclear energy should play in meeting the growing demand for
energy, whilst also meeting climate change goals through reduced carbon
emissions, continues to be a source of debate. The UK remains fully committed to
the promotion of safe nuclear energy by those who wish to use it.

Our own

programme of civil nuclear new-build is testament to that commitment.

3. A commitment to civil nuclear energy comes with responsibilities. The UK
encourages States to become party to the various Conventions relating to nuclear
safety, management of nuclear material, and nuclear accident procedures. It is also
important that signatories participate fully in the spirit and intent of the objectives of
these Conventions, and implement them fully. These conventions are crucial, and
we commend the leadership of the IAEA in coordinating and implementing the
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, and for hosting the Nuclear Security Conference in
July 2013. We understand that many Member States have made good progress in
implementing the IAEA Action Plan. We support the practice of publishing reports
on the progress to date, and the notification of progress to the IAEA.

4. An independent and robust regulator is crucial to the safe and secure development
of civil nuclear energy. The nuclear regulatory framework in the UK has recently
been enhanced through the transition of the Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) to
an independent, statutory body with effect from 1 April. The ONR brings together
the functions of civil nuclear safety, security, safeguards implementation, radioactive
materials transport and health and safety on nuclear sites, and provides a model for
an effective, open and transparent regulator.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr. Chairman,
5. In October 2011 the UK welcomed an International Physical Protection Advisory
Service (IPPAS) Mission to the UK, the first Nuclear Weapon State to do so. The
Mission visited the Sellafield civil nuclear site and Barrow port, and concluded that
the civil nuclear security in place was robust. Earlier this year, we invited the IAEA
to send a follow-up IPPAS Mission to the UK, which we hope to host in 2015-16.

6. The UK is proud of its support to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and will provide a
further £3.4m to the Fund this year, bringing the total UK contribution since 2010 to
over £12m. We urge other States who are able to provide contributions to do so. We
also commend global efforts to minimise use of high enriched uranium, and replace
its use in research reactors with low enriched uranium wherever possible. In this
regard the UK is taking steps to defuel its last HEU-fuelled research reactor, and to
move the fuel for long term management.

7. On a separate note, effective safety, security and safeguards procedures also
underpin the safe and assured use of small scale nuclear techniques, contributing
markedly to a better quality of life in nearly every country. The wider use of nuclear
applications, including medical diagnosis and treatment, crop protection, and
understanding climate change better, is recognised as a major potential contribution
to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

The UK is fully

supportive of the work done by the IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme in
these wider uses of nuclear applications.

Mr. Chairman,
8. Very few, if any, states have all the necessary resources, expertise or experience, to
research, develop, and utilise civil nuclear energy for their own benefit, in line with
the rights expressed in Article IV of the NPT. Cooperation and partnership are
essential, and will become even more important as resources become more
stretched. So the frameworks for participating in the fullest possible exchanges of

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

equipment, materials, and scientific and technological information are fundamental.
Based on our experience in the successful operation of nuclear facilities since the
mid-1950s, the UK takes pride in its record as a partner on nuclear technology and
skills. We continue to promote formal and informal cooperation agreements with
others on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

9. The UK also supports efforts to develop multinational approaches to the nuclear fuel
cycle. By removing or reducing the risks of interruption to fuel supply, or removing
the potential costs of unnecessary fuel cycle facilities, such measures can assist
those States who seek to introduce or expand a civil nuclear power programme.
Multinational approaches can also help reinforce international standards of safety
and security. Moreover they pose no burden or impact on those States who do not
wish to pursue nuclear energy or use them.

10. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the UK notes that the role of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy can only intensify as the world seeks ever more energy, reliably and
sustainably, and looks to nuclear technology to play an increasing role in securing
better quality and duration of life for so many more people. The role of the NPT – to
help the world take advantage of what nuclear technologies have to offer in a safe,
secure, and sustainable way – becomes ever more important. The United Kingdom
is fully committed to the NPT and to the 2010 Action Plan. In this regard we strongly
support the work of the IAEA, and look to the future as a committed global partner
across the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

