Mr. Chairman,
The Non-Proliferation Treaty recognizes in Article IV the inalienable right of the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, II and III of the NPT. Nothing in the Treaty should be interpreted as affecting that right. We would like to underscore the importance of peaceful nuclear technology for the sustainable socioeconomic development of nations, provided that nuclear activities of the States are subject to full scope IAEA safeguards.
In that context, we stress the value and importance of the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, which plays an important role in the development of the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We also acknowledge the wide use of nuclear technology in the areas of health, industry, agriculture and environmental protection. It is important to ensure that the IAEA programme is adequately and predictably financed.
Strong efforts should be made to ensure that the States use nuclear energy in a way that reduces proliferation risks and with the highest international standards for safeguards, security and safety.
Ukraine stands firm in this course. President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych in April this year, at Washington Nuclear Security Summit, announced the decision of Ukraine to get rid of all national stocks of high enriched uranium by 2012, provided there is sufficient international assistance. As a first step, we will remove even this year a substantial part of our stock for its downgrading to the low enriched uranium to be used by the Ukrainian nuclear research facilities. The meaning of our voluntary step is crystal clear - Ukraine takes nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament seriously. We expect that our example will serve as a pattern for others. Our decision is also another proof of our commitment to the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1887(2009).
It is important to continue international cooperation in order to strengthen nuclear security, safe waste management, radiological protection and civil nuclear liability. We call upon States that have not yet done so to accede to all relevant IAEA conventions as soon as possible and to implement them fully and efficiently.
Ensuring nuclear fuel supply is a very complex and multi-dimensional concept with many technical, legal, commercial and economic implications. We remain fully convinced of the benefits of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, in which assurance mechanisms should not act to distort the existing well-functioning market. At the same time they should address the right of peaceful uses of nuclear energy by providing nuclear fuel supply security for countries developing a nuclear programme in the best safety, security and non-proliferation conditions.
We acknowledge that several initiatives, including the establishment of a Low Enriched Uranium Bank under the control of the IAEA, can provide back-up mechanisms to interested countries and facilitate lasting multilateral solutions for the expanding need for nuclear fuel and nuclear fuel services while minimizing the risk of proliferation. We urge the IAEA Board of Governors to agree upon measures to this end. Therefore, we welcome the recent agreement between the IAEA and the Russian Federation to establish a reserve of low enriched uranium (LEU) for supply to the IAEA to be located at the International Uranium Enrichment Centre in Angarsk, Russia,
Thank you.











2





Georgetown 2011-12		
[File Name]	[Name]


 PAGE   \* MERGEFORMAT 1



