STATEMENT by the Head of the delegation of Ukraine at the First session
ofthe Preparatory Committee for the 2020 NPT Review Conference
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy (cluster 3)
Mr Chairman,
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European
Union and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity.
The Article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons recognizes the inalienable right of the parties to the Treaty to
develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of the NPT. We
would like to underline that nothing in the Treaty should be interpreted as
affecting this right.
Ukraine underscores the importance of peaceful nuclear technology for
sustainable socio-economic development of nations, provided that nuclear
activities of states are subject to the full scope IAEA safeguards. Strong efforts
should be made to ensure that states use nuclear energy in a way that reduces
proliferation risks and with the highest international standards for
safeguards, nuclear safety and security.
In this regard, we reiterate our strong support for the Agency's
Technical Cooperation Programme (Tep), which plays an important role in
the development of application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and
serves as a powerful tool for exchange of nuclear knowledge and capacity
building in member states.
Proceeding from interests of Ukraine as a part of European region, we
expect that nuclear safety, nuclear medicine, decommissioning, radioactive
waste management and nuclear security will constitute priority thematic
areas for the IAEA technical cooperation for the nearest future.
The IAEA regional and national technical cooperation projects have
significantly contributed to nuclear safety and improving an overall
effectiveness of peaceful use of nuclear energy in Ukraine.
Among National projects for 2016-2017 Ukraine attaches particular
significance to the implementation of the project «Rendering assistance in
decommissioning and radioactive waste management at the Chornobyl NPP
onsite» and relevant regional projects aimed at supporting radiological
management of abandoned areas following the Chornobyl accident and
dissemination of Chornobyl NPP related information.
Ukraine stands ready to actively cooperate with the Agency on
Chornobyl related issues for the next TCP project cycle for 2018-2019 by
further implementing, inter alia, a national project aimed at supporting
Chornobyl NPP Units Decommissioning and Radioactive Waste Management
at the NPP site and within the Exclusion Zone.

Mr Chairman,
The minimization of consequences of the Chornobyl accident, social and
economic rehabilitation of contaminated territories constitute a priority for
the Government of Ukraine.
After several years of construction work and with support provided by
international donors, Ukraine wishes to highlight the successful example of
post-accident activities aimed at converting the destroyed Unit 4 into an
environmentally safe system enabling safe demolition of unstable structures
through the use of remote and state-of-art operated equipment.
The New Safe Confinement is an unprecedented engineer project in
terms of design and construction. Never before has such a huge structure
been constructed at a heavily contaminated site: the NSC is 108 meters high
and 162 meters long, and has a span of257 meters, the arch-shaped structure
weighs approximately 36,000 tones. Its frame is a huge lattice construction of
tubular steel elements, supported by two longitudinal concrete beams.
Being a key part of the Shelter Implementation Plan, the construction of
the NSC at the site started in 2010, and is scheduled to be completed in 2017.
We are ready to share our national experience with international
partners and the IAEA Secretariat.
Mr Chairman,
Nuclear power will remain an important option to achieve energy
security and sustainable development goals in the 21 st century. Ukraine
supports countries' decisions to develop or further expend civil nuclear
power programs. In our view the main prerequisite for the peaceful use of
the nuclear energy is the state's commitment to non-proliferation regime and
to the highest standards of nuclear safety and security.
Ukrainian nuclear energy sector operates in the framework of national
and international standards and requirements on providing nuclear safety,
nuclear security as well as radiological safety. Ukraine demonstrates the
reliability and transparency of the existing control over nuclear materials. We
established the system of nuclear security, which meets the international
standards. The relevant national regulations on safety culture of nuclear
plants and facilities, radiological waste management, other sources of ionising
radiation have been developed; the site inspections of the system of nuclear
security of NPPs, specialized enterprises and medical facilities have been fully
completed.
As the responsibility for nuclear security rests with individual state,
Ukraine wishes to underline that all nuclear facilities of Ukraine are operating
in a regular mode. Additional effective measures were undertaken by the
competent authorities of Ukraine to ensure their nuclear security, including
reinforced physical protection of 15 power units in operation at 4 sites of
Ukrainian NPPs.

•

At present, we can confirm the high level of nuclear safety and
nuclear security at the Ukrainian NPPs, where nuclear materials are stored
and used.

Thank you, Mr Chairman

