STATEMENT
by the Delegation of Ukraine at the First Session of
the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 NPT Review Conference
Peaceful uses of nuclear enerev (cluster 3)

Ukraine associates itself with the statement made by the European Union. In national
capacity we would like to add few points on this agenda item.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty recognizes in Article IV the inalienable right of the parties
to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I, I1 and I11 of the NPT. We would like to
underline that nothing in the Treaty should be interpreted as affecting this right.
Ukraine underscores the importance of peaceful nuclear technology for sustainable
socio-economic development of nations, provided that nuclear activities of states are subject to
full scope IAEA safeguards. Strong efforts should be made to ensure that states use nuclear
energy in a way that reduces proliferation risks and with the highest international standards for
safeguards, security and safety.
In that context, we would like to stress the value and importance of the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Programme, which plays an important role in the development of the application of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We acknowledge the wide use of nuclear technology in the
areas of health, industry, agriculture, water treatment and environmental protection. It is
important to ensure that the IAEA TC Programme is adequately and predictably financed.
Emerging and expanding nuclear power programmes would be short-lived without proper
attention to safety and security. We strongly support the Agency's activities aimed at improving
nuclear, radiation, transport and waste safety worldwide. It is important to continue international
cooperation in order to strengthen nuclear security, safe waste management and radiological
protection. We call upon states that have not yet done so to accede to all relevant IAEA
conventions and international instruments as soon as possible and to implement them efficiently.
Ukraine, possessing considerable scientific potential in the area of nuclear technologies
and applications and having the long-term plans on development of nuclear energy, supports the
Agency's role in international projects on innovative and improved nuclear reactors and fuel
cycles. Ensuring nuclear fuel supply is a very complex and multi-dimensional concept with
many technical, legal, commercial and economic implications. We remain convinced of the
benefits of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle, in which assurance mechanisms do
not distort the existing nuclear market and address fully the right of states to peacehl uses of
nuclear energy. We acknowledge that several existing initiatives, including the IAEA Low
Enriched Uranium Bank, can provide necessary back-up mechanisms to interested countries and
facilitate lasting multilateral solutions for the expanding need for nuclear fuel and nuclear fuel
services while minimizing the risk of proliferation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

