Main Committee III
U.S. Statement
2015 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
Dr. Alex Burkart
Deputy Director of the Office of Nuclear Energy, Safety, and Security
Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation
United Nations, New York, New York
May 4, 2015
As Prepared for Delivery
Mr. Chairman,
I congratulate you on your Chairmanship of the third Main Committee of this conference. The
United States offers its full cooperation with you to ensure the success of this Committee’s work.
The United States is fully committed to promoting access to nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes in accordance with Article IV of the NPT and continues to pursue practical measures to
implement that commitment.
Secretary Kerry made this abundantly clear during his statement in the Review Conference’s
plenary session, including through his announcement that the United States will make an
additional commitment of $50 million over the next five years to the IAEA’s Peaceful Uses
Initiative (PUI). This is just one important part of our long-standing and continued support for
IAEA efforts to expand access to nuclear energy and technology.
Mr. Chairman,
A strong nonproliferation regime is a necessary basis for ensuring robust cooperation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The United States fully recognizes that no approach to
nonproliferation will succeed if it is based on the denial of rights to nations that play by the rules.
We also emphasize the need for new frameworks for civil nuclear cooperation so that countries
can access peaceful power without increasing the risks of proliferation. These principles guide
U.S. policy. We seek to secure and minimize the civil use of highly enriched uranium, while
cooperating to develop and deploy technologies that can achieve the same benefits without use of
HEU. We also encourage our partners to rely on the global market as well as fuel assurance
mechanisms, to which we have provided tangible support, as an alternative to pursuing
indigenous enrichment and reprocessing capabilities. For states new to nuclear power, we
commend the efforts underway in the International Framework for Nuclear Energy Cooperation
to explore alternative, multilateral approaches to the back end of the fuel cycle.
The United States takes pride in our record on peaceful nuclear cooperation. We are a major
promoter of global nuclear commerce, with 22 bilateral agreements in place that provide the
basis for cooperation with 49 partners. These agreements bind both our partners and us to strict
nonproliferation conditions that meet our NPT obligations and commitments under the Nuclear
Suppliers Guidelines.

Much of our cooperation is focused on nuclear power, demand for which we expect to continue
to grow. Use or pursuit of nuclear power requires having in place national infrastructure that
meets the highest standards for safety, security and nonproliferation. The United States is a
strong supporter, both technically and financially, of bilateral and IAEA programs to assist states
in this area.
Nuclear safety remains critically important to the future of peaceful uses, and is another area
where the IAEA plays an essential role. The impacts of the March 2011 accident at the
Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plants are still with us. We welcome efforts to review the
foundations of nuclear safety, to include the recent Vienna Declaration on Nuclear Safety, which
we strongly support. We also wish to underline our strongest support for implementation of the
IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and the Convention on Nuclear Safety. And finally, we
welcome the entry into force of the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear
Damage.
Improving nuclear safety in the future requires dealing with legacy issues of the past, in
particular the accident at Chornobyl. As the largest bilateral donor to the Chornobyl Shelter
Fund, the United States works closely with the G7 and the European Commission to support
Ukraine in returning the Chornobyl site to an environmentally safe and stable condition. We
welcome the successful pledging conference last week that raised 165 million euros toward
completing the job.
Mr. Chairman,
The contributions of peaceful nuclear energy extend well beyond the production of power. Its
use to foster sustainable development is one of the least well known achievements of the nuclear
era. Every day, the peaceful atom is being used to promote development, including the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and we believe it will play an important
role in the post-2015 Development Agenda.
The United States is proud to be the single largest contributor to IAEA technical assistance
programs. Since 2010, we have provided close to $200 million in support of these efforts.
The United States is helping to upgrade the IAEA nuclear applications laboratories at
Seibersdorf. We were pleased to announce last week that we will provide an additional $2
million to ensure that these laboratories can continue to share the benefits of nuclear sciences
with IAEA member states. We encourage others to join us in contributing to this essential
project, so that construction can begin as early as this fall.
As noted by Secretary Kerry, the United States will contribute another $50 million towards the
PUI, making our total pledge $100 million since 2010. The United States is deeply grateful for
the generosity of the other donors in the international community that have joined us in
contributing to the PUI, and for those that have announced new pledges here at this Review
Conference.

The IAEA’s PUI is advancing Article IV of the NPT. More than 150 IAEA Member States have
now benefited from it. PUI is promoting food security by improving the detection of animal
diseases; advancing human health by expanding the capacity to treat cancer and for the early
detection of disease; and protecting our planet by tracing pollution in oceans and documenting
the impacts of climate change. These are major achievements that are making an extraordinary
difference in the lives of millions of people worldwide.
There can be no doubt of our commitment to the NPT’s third pillar. It is our hope that this
conference will reflect the advances in peaceful nuclear technology sharing and identify steps to
further strengthen this important pillar. We have identified a number of actions this Review
Conference could take in Working Paper 46.
Mr. Chairman,
At this juncture, I would like to highlight submission of Working Paper 47, on the issue of NPT
withdrawal.
This discussion paper focuses on ways that states might misuse the NPT withdrawal provision,
and specific steps that could be taken to respond to – and discourage – such misuse.
By spelling out those steps, we hope to make clear that states could not expect to take advantage
of their withdrawal from the NPT for illegitimate purposes.
While the 2010 Final Document cites “divergent views” on withdrawal, this is an area where
consensus should be possible if we work together to come to a common understanding of
measures that could be put in place to dissuade countries from withdrawing.
As with others, I would like to submit more formal remarks on withdrawal for the record in an
effort to make the most efficient use of our time here in Main Committee 3.
Thank you.

