Statement by Mr. Richard J. Stratford
Director
Office of Nuclear Energy Safety and Security
Department of State
United States of America

Cluster 3 Issues
First Session of the Preparatory Committee
2015 Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
May 9,2012

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Article IV of the NPT recognizes the right of Parties to develop the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, and commits them to international cooperation to spread
these benefits. Although the 201 1 events at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant have affected public perceptions of the safety of nuclear power, the basic
factors that led to an increased interest in nuclear power before that incident have
not changed -- increasing global demand for energy, as well as concerns about
climate change, energy security, and uncertainty about fossil fuel supplies.
As President Obama reminded us all in his remarks at Seoul on March 26,
we should never forget "the astonishing benefits that nuclear technology has
brought to our lives . . . it's the energy-the

clean energy-that

helps cut the carbon

pollution that contributes to climate change." The United States continues to
support the safe and secure expansion of nuclear power. The U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission relicensed nine existing U.S. nuclear reactors in 201 1 and
issued the first two licenses for new reactor construction in the United States in
over 30 years.
Mr. Chairman,
Nuclear power presents a unique set of challenges, most notably challenges
related to safety, security, and nonproliferation. Countries that use nuclear power
or are considering its adoption must consider fully these challenges. Consistent
with Article IV, the United States actively supports efforts to enable countries to
develop responsible nuclear power programs by helping them to build the
infrastructure needed to meet the highest levels of safety, security, and
nonproliferation. We are pursuing this goal through both bilateral assistance and

through multilateral means such as the International Framework for Nuclear
Energy Cooperation and the numerous programs of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

We have also supported new, multilateral approaches to the he1 cycle,
including the nuclear fuel reserve in Angarsk, Russia, the IAEA low enriched
uranium bank, and the Model Nuclear Fuel Assurances Agreement approved by
the IAEA Board in 20 1 1. Fuel assurances encourage and support the expansion of
peaceful nuclear energy without increasing the risk of nuclear weapons
proliferation and nuclear terrorism. We have also established the American
Assured Fuel Supply, comprised of over 17 metric tons of surplus highly enriched
uranium downblended to serve as a backup source of low-enriched uranium for the
civil nuclear market.

These mechanisms respect the rights of all IAEA Member States who live
up to their obligations, including those who wish to pursue civil nuclear power
without the costly challenge of having to develop an enrichment capability. Our
Assured Fuel Supply also demonstrates how disarmament progress has helped fuel
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by disposing of high-enriched uranium
removed from military programs through peaceful use of this material.

Securing Fissile Material:

Mr. Chairman,
In April 20 10 President Obama hosted in Washington a gathering of 50
global leaders at the Nuclear Security Summit, an integral part of the

Administration's strategy for leading a worldwide effort to secure vulnerable
nuclear material. The leaders agreed on the seriousness of the threat of nuclear
terrorism and on the necessity of working together to reduce this threat. The
Summit highlighted the key role of the IAEA in supporting the efforts of its
Member States in protecting their nuclear materials. Thirty-two countries made
over 70 specific commitments to enhance nuclear security, many of which have
been completed.
The second Nuclear Security Summit was held last March in Seoul,
Republic of Korea. Seoul Summit participants agreed to a detailed communiquk
that builds on the objectives and measures set out in the 20 10 Washington
communiquk. In Seoul, countries provided progress reports outlining their
accomplishments since the Washington Summit. The next Nuclear Security
Summit will be held in 2014 in the Netherlands.
These Summits reinforced the existing international legal architecture that
governs nuclear security, including UN Security Council Resolution 1540. This
resolution, adopted in 2004, is designed to prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems, or related materials, particularly to non-state
actors. The resolution requires states to undertake a number of steps to strengthen
their nonproliferation and chemical, biological, and nuclear security capabilities.
In support of Resolution 1540, the United States voluntarily contributed $3 million
to the UN Trust Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament to support global
implementation activities. We see our own implementation of the Resolution as
essential for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Also important is our role in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism. Currently, 85 countries and four official observers participate as
partners in this Initiative, which aims to improve global capacity to prevent, detect,
and respond to nuclear terrorism. Finally, the Group of Eight works to strengthen
nuclear security through its Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction, which was initiated at the 2002 G-8 Summit as a
cooperative effort to prevent terrorists or states that support terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. The Partnership is now evolving into a
global initiative of 24 partners, with an agenda of global chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear threat reduction. At the 201 1 (3-8 Summit in Deauville,
France, the leaders decided to extend the effort for another ten years. The United
States plans to provide $10 billion for the Global Partnership from 20 12 to 2022.
Through our vigorous support for the Nuclear Security Summits, Resolution
1540, the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, and the Global
Partnership, the United States is facilitating concrete progress on the portion of the
201 0 Action Plan that relates to the strongest possible regime for nuclear security.

Nuclear safety is another critical dimension of the peaceful use of nuclear
energy, and my delegation will address this subject during the third specific issue
session.

Non-Power Peaceful Uses:

As President Obama reminded us in Seoul, the non-power applications of
nuclear energy also offer widespread benefits. "Nuclear technology helps make
our food safe, .. . prevents disease in the developing world . . . treats cancer and
-5-

finds new cures." Since 201 0, the IAEA Director General Amano has reminded us
of how broad nuclear applications are, focusing attention in 2010 on applications to
cancer, in 201 1 on water resource management, and this year on food security.
The United States is proud of its long-standing record in supporting these
programs, and commends the Director General's efforts.
Indeed, the United States has long been the largest single contributor to
IAEA peaceful uses programs in both power and non-power areas. Since the 2010
Review Conference, we have expanded this support significantly through our
contributions to the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative. We commend those countries
that have joined us in this effort to expand support for the IAEA, as called for by
the 20 10 NPT Final Document, namely Japan, the Republic of Korea, Sweden,
Hungary, New Zealand, and the Czech Republic. We would like to welcome the
support of Kazakhstan, just announced at this PrepCom last week, and the fact that
New Zealand, as we understand it, has decided to offer its second contribution to
the Peaceful Uses Initiative. We encourage all countries that are in a position to do
so to help us further expand access to these important technologies and
applications.
I am pleased to announce today that the United States has pledged this week
nearly two million additional U.S. dollars for IAEA projects proposed under the
Peaceful Uses Initiative. This brings total U.S. support under the Initiative to
nearly $20 million since the 20 10 Review Conference, which has funded efforts in
human health, water resource management, food security, and nuclear power
infrastructure.

Nearly 120 countries have participated in projects funded through these
contributions, an important reminder that, just as we all have a role to play in
strengthening the nonproliferation regime, we all benefit from a regime that helps
us access the peaceful benefits of nuclear energy. My delegation has prepared a
brief description of the U.S. contribution to the PUI, and PrepCom participants are
welcome to a copy of this description.

In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, let me return to President Obama's remarks at
Seoul on March 26, where he noted the challenge of future generations to develop
nuclear energy systems that unlock the promise of the atom without putting nations
and terrorists within reach of nuclear weapons. These goals are inextricably
linked. As the President said, "[When] we enhance security, we're in a stronger
position to harness safe, clean nuclear energy. When we develop new, safer
approaches to nuclear energy, we reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism and
proliferation. When nations, including my own, fulfill our responsibilities, it
strengthens our ability to ensure that other nations fulfill their responsibilities. And
step by step, we come closer to the security and peace of a world without nuclear
weapons."

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

