STATEMENT ON CLUSTER THREE ISSUES AT THE SECOND
SESSION OF THE . PREPCOM FOR THE 2020 NUCLEAR NONPROLIFERATION TREATY (NPT) REVIEW CONFERENCE: 23 APRIL
- 5 MAY 2018: GENEY A

· Thank you Mr Chairman.
As we are in the final stages of this second session of the PrepCom, allow me to
start by commending you on the professional manner in which you are steering
.its proceedings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the NonAligned Movement and the African Group on Cluster III issues. We therefore
take the floor to reinforce some points and to make some additional comments
in our national capacity . .

Chair,
Zimbabwe wishes to reiterate its unequivocal commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty which is the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation
regime. However, as·we have said before, the foundation of the NPT rests on
three pillars - disarmament, non-proliferation and access to, and use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes - all of which are of equal weight and importance.
It is in this respect that Zimbabwe takes its membership of, and its obligations,
under both the NPT and the IAEA, very seriously. Hence our keen interest and
active engagement in contributing towards the successful outcome of this
preparatory process leading to the 2020 NPT Review Conference.

Chair,
In more than 60 years of its existence, the IAEA has accomplished remarkable
progress in availing the benefits of nuclear science and technology to the service

of humanity in terms of civilian applications. We want more attention to be
given to this third pillar of the NPT. Our own limited collaboration as a country
with the IAEA has yielded .many practical results and tangible benefits for the
country. Indeed our review of the NPT in 2020 should closely examine Article
IV of the Treaty to see how this provision, which guarantees the inalienable
right of all states to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, can be operationalised.

Finally Chair,
My delegation wishes to point out that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the EU plus 3 has demonstrated the
enormous potential and possibilities that international co-operation, dialogue
and patient diplomacy can bring about, in the peaceful conduct of relations
between and among states .

It will be remiss on my part if I fail to express the concern and disappointment
of my delegation at the persistent attempts to politicise the work of the IAEA, as .
well as to smuggle into this PrepCom process, issues that fall outside the ambit
of the NPT.

Mr Chairman

I thank You

