STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR G.T. MUTANDIRO TO THE FIRST
SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE 2015
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY REVIEW CONFERENCE

Mr President
Distinguished Delegates
On behalf of the delegation of Zimbabwe, allow me Mr President to
commend you for the able and professional manner in which you have
conducted our deliberations. My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the distinguished delegate of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr President, Zimbabwe reaffirms its belief that the NPT is the cornerstone
of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, that it is the basis for us to
pursue nuclear disarmament and guarantee the inalienable rights of State
parties to develop research, production and use of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes. All State Parties must commit themselves to a balanced
implementation of the three pillars of the Treaty in a non-discriminatory
manner. From the views expressed by many delegations, it cannot be
disputed that there is consensus that the absence of balance in the
implementation of the Treaty is cause for great concern. Greater emphasis
continues to be placed on non-proliferation whilst peaceful uses of the atom
and most critically, disarmament, are given lesser prioritisation. The three
pillars of the Treaty are mutually reinforcing towards the achievement of its
objectives.
The 2010 Review Conference Action Plan reaffirmed the inalienable right of
State Parties to develop research, production and the use of peaceful
nuclear energy without discrimination and in conformity with articles I,I1
and IV of the Treaty and also acknowledged that this constituted one of its
fundamental objective. This also was acknowledgement of the fundamental
role that the IAEA plays towards this end. The Agency's Technical
Cooperation (TC) Programme continues to contribute significantly to the
development priorities of many developing countries. Its Technical
Cooperation activities that seek to promote the application of nuclear
science and technology for peaceful purposes in areas such as human and
animal health, agriculture, water resources management and environment

protection amongst others, remain relevant and critical in developing
countries' endeavours towards the attainment of socio-economic growth.
Benefits ensuing from these uses of nuclear applications continue to boost
economic development through releasing resources to other needy sectors,
thus contributing towards the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDG).
Mr President,
As is the case with other developing countries, Zimbabwe has and continues
to benefit immensely from the applications of nuclear science and
technology in areas such as cancer therapy, nuclear medicine, crop
production, animal health, energy planning and radiation safety.
Techniques such as the early application of rapid and sensitive diagnostic
methods in the control of trans-boundary animal diseases have drastically
reduced the prevalence of some animal diseases including foot-and-mouth
in the Southern African region. Developing countries have also benefited
from other nuclear application techniques that include the improvement of
yields in crop production, human health, the development and integrated
application of pest control programmes such as the AU - PATEC and water
resources management.
Mr President,
My country is actively involved in activities of the Forum for Nuclear
Regulatory Bodies in Africa (FNRBA) which was given momentum by the
entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty establishing a Nuclear Weapons
Free Zone on the African continent. To further complement the initiatives of
the FNRBA, my Government hosted a SADC Nuclear Regulators Meeting in
Harare in February 2011 to establish a network of nuclear regulators for the
SADC region. The meeting came up with a cooperative agreement which
was signed by SADC Member States. It is envisaged that this process will
culminate in the signature of a SADC Protocol on Nuclear Radiation Safety.
Furthermore, in March 2012, Zimbabwe hosted a meeting for Piloting,
Monitoring and Evaluation of TC Programmes, which finalised methodologies
for the 2012/13 TC Programme and ongoing cycles.
Mr President,

It may be recalled that the 2010 Review Conference also urged that "in all
activities designed to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
preferential treatment be given to the non-nuclear States parties to the
Treaty, with due consideration to the needs of the developing areas of the
world" It also reaffirmed that State parties undertake to facilitate and have
right to the fullest possible exchange of equipment and the requisite
information. It is against this background that Zimbabwe joins other
Member States in calling for the provision of sufficient, assured and
predictable financial resources for the TC Programme. We also endorse the
recommendation that the TC fund be funded from the regular budget.

Mr President,
Zimbabwe is concerned that some States continue to hinder the transfer of
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to least developed NPT State
parties, imposing unjustifiable conditionalities in violation of Article IV of the
Treaty and the imperative need for State parties to respect each other's
choices and sovereign decisions in this regard. Zimbabwe is unreservedly
committed to upholding the global nuclear non-proliferation agenda,
supports strict adherence to safeguards obligations and underscores the
right of State Parties to research, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination. We equally reject any attempts to
politicise the IAEA's Technical Cooperation Programme in violation of the
Statute of the IAEA. I n view of the critical importance of the Agency's
promotional role as provided in article I1 of its statutes, it is imperative that
all member states lend maximum support to initiatives in this regard and
desist from action that undermines the Agency's Statute, its efficacy and
effectiveness.
Mr President,
Radiological incidents, the most recent of which is the tragic Fukushima
accident have demonstrated the critical need for the IAEA to assist Member
States build capacities and infrastructure to ensure the safe and secure use
of nuclear energy and technologies. Zimbabwe fully supports IAEA nuclear
safety and security programmes and it also believes that these are multidimensional and complimentary sectors. Whilst Nuclear energy can only
benefit mankind when used in a safe and secure environment, my
government is increasingly concerned over the growing tendency to place

greater priority on the Agency's non-promotional activities at the expense of
technical cooperation activities. We also believe that considerations of
nuclear safety and security considerations should not be used as a pretext
to impede member states from full access to nuclear technologies for
peaceful applications as provided by the Agency's statutes.
Mr President,

I n conclusion, my delegation hopes that the deliberations of this Preparatory
Committee session will inject further impetus towards the implementation of
the 2010 Action Plan.

I thank you.

